

political culture reflects the political values and beliefs of a people. It explains how people feel about their government—their expectations of what powers it should have
over their lives, the services it should provide, and their ability to influence its actions. A politi-cal culture is developed by historical experience over generations through agents of socializa-tion such as family, religion, peer group, and education. It is characterized by the level of ethnic, social, and religious diversity it tolerates; by the level of citizen participation it allows; by the societal role it assigns to the state; and by citizens’ perception of their status within the political system. A people’s political behavior is shaped by its political culture within which it is formed. The
Spanish conquest and settlement of Texas provided the first European influence on Texas cul-ture. Some elements of the ranchero culture and the Catholic religion continue to this day and represent the enduring Spanish influence on our culture. The immigration of Anglo-Saxon southerners in the early 1800s brought Texas the plantation and slave-owning culture. This culture became dominant following the Texas Revolution. Although it was modified to an extent by the Civil War, it remained the dominant Texas culture. However, ethnic and racial diversification, migration, and urbanization have gradually
eroded the dominance of the traditional southern Anglo culture over time, with this erosion especially notable over the last 40 years. During the past four decades, Texas has not only become one of the most diverse multicultural states in the country, but it has also become one of the most urbanized; two-thirds of the population now reside in one of four major metro-politan regions (Austin, Dallas–Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio), and Texans living in rural areas today account for only one-tenth of the population. We begin by exploring the state’s dominant political culture and ideology and how they
influence partisanship and public policy. Then, we look at other aspects of the state’s political culture and examine the subtle variations in the state from one region to another. We then review the battles for gender, ethnic, racial, and LGBTQ equality and the impact of these civil rights struggles and their outcomes, along with the state’s increasing diversity, on politics and policy.

Ideology The Texas brand of conservatism is skeptical of state government involvement in the economy. A majority of Texans favor low taxes, modest state services, and few business regulations. Because they support economic individualism and free-market capitalism, Texans generally value profit as a healthy incentive to promote economic investment and individual effort, while they see social class inequality as the inevitable result of free-market capitalism. For them, an individual’s quality of life is largely a matter of personal responsibility rather than an issue of public policy. Some conservatives accept an active role for the government in promoting business. They
are willing to support direct government subsidies and special tax breaks for businesses to encourage economic growth. They may also support state spending for infrastructure, such as transportation and education, that sustains commercial and manufacturing activity.

Social conservatives support energetic government activity to enforce what they view as
moral behavior and traditional cultural values. For example, social conservatives, who often are evangelical Christians, usually advocate for the use of state power to limit abortion and marijuana usage. A distinct minority in Texas, liberal Texans believe in using government to improve the
welfare of individuals; they favor government regulation of the economy, actively support the expansion of civil rights, and embrace social change. Liberals believe state government can be used as a positive tool to benefit the population as a whole. Most Texas liberals accept private enterprise as the state’s basic economic system but believe excesses of unregulated capitalism compromise the common good. They endorse state policies to abate pollution, increase govern-ment investment in public education and health care, protect workers and consumers, and prevent discrimination against ethnic and racial minorities and members of the LGBTQ community, among others. Liberals often believe that a great deal of social inequality results from institutional and
economic forces that are often beyond a single individual’s control. As a result, they support the use of government power to balance these forces and to promote a better quality of life for middle-and lower-income people. For example, liberals argue that it is fair to tax those with the greatest ability to pay and to provide social services for the community as a whole. A significant number of Texans have mixed views. On some issues, they take a liberal
position, but on others they have a conservative perspective or no opinion at all. Others have moderate views: Figure 1.1 shows that 25 percent of Texans say that they are “in the middle”; that is, their beliefs are between conservative and liberal viewpoints. The “Think Critically and Get Active!” features in this and later chapters give you the tools to explore Texa

Conservatives and Liberals in Texas Today Figure 1.1 provides information on the ideological self-identification of Texans overall and among subgroups of Texans based on their gender, ethnic and racial identity, and genera-tion. The data are drawn from a series of University of Texas/Texas Tribune statewide polls of registered voters conducted between 2018 and 2023.1
A survey question asked
respondents to place themselves on a seven-point ideological scale where 1 was “extremely liberal,” 4 “in the middle,” and 7 “extremely conservative.” Respondents who located themselves as a 5, 6, or 7 are considered to be conservative; as a 1, 2, or 3 to be liberal; and as a 4 to be moderate. Close to half of Texans (45 percent) identify as conservative, while close to one-third
(30 percent) identify as liberal. Figure 1.1 highlights, however, that these statewide percent-ages mask considerable ideological variance among men and women, members of different ethnic and racial groups, and generational cohorts. For example, men as a group are nota-bly more conservative than women (49 percent vs. 42 percent), and non-Hispanic Whites (i.e., Anglos) (55 percent) are notably more conservative than Asian Americans (36 percent), Latinos (34 percent), or African Americans (20 percent). At the same time, however, no noteworthy gender, ethnic and racial differences exist in the proportion of liberals, which are fairly equal between men and women and among the four principal ethnic and racial groups in the state, with the exception of a notably larger proportion of African Americans than Anglos being liberal. Data also are provided for Texans based on their generation: Generation Z (those born since
1997), Millennials (those born between 1981 and 1996), Generation X (those born between 1965 and 1980), Baby Boomers (those born between 1946 and 1964), and the Silent Genera-tion (those born between 1928 and 1945).2
As a group, both Generation Z and Millennials tend to be significantly less conservative and, in the case of Generation Z, more liberal than


members of the other generations, with the ideological gulf separating Generation Z from their Baby Boomer and Silent Generation grandparents and great-grandparents the widest. It will remain to be seen if the members of Generation Z will become more conservative (and less liberal) as they age, or if this more liberal ideological profile will remain a hallmark of Generation Z for years to come. Figure 1.2 highlights the considerable amount of ideological variance across the state’s
24 most populous counties, which combined, contain more than three-fourths (76 percent) of the Texas population. Standing alone at the liberal end of the spectrum is Travis County

(Austin), with an average ideological score of 3.37, followed by Dallas County (Dallas) at 3.78. These two most liberal counties are followed by a quintet of counties which includes two of the state’s three other major metro counties: Bexar (San Antonio) and Harris (Houston), along with Galveston (a suburb of Houston), Webb (Laredo), and Collin (a suburb to the north of Dallas).

Partisanship Figure 1.3 shows that 45 percent of all Texans self-identify as Republicans and 45 percent as Democrats. One out of every ten Texans (10 percent) is a true independent, that is someone who does not identify in any way with either the Democratic Party and the Republican Party. The figure also underscores the substantial gender, ethnic or racial, and generational
differences in party identification in Texas. For example, women (49 percent) are significantly more likely to identify as Democrats than men (41 percent). Profound ethnic and racial parti-san identification gaps exist, with 80 percent of African Americans identifying as Democrats and a mere 10 percent as Republicans. In contrast 35 percent of Anglos identify as Demo-crats and 56 percent as Republicans. Among Latinos, 54 percent identify as Democrats and 35 percent as Republicans, with relatively similar numbers for Asian Americans, 45 percent of whom identify as Democrats and 39 percent who identify as Republicans. A little more than one half of both Generation Z (53 percent) and Millennials (53 percent) identify as Demo-crats and 34 and 35 percent as Republicans respectively. The proportions are roughly reversed for their Boomer and Silent Generation elders, who are much more likely to self-identify as Republicans (51 and 56 percent) than as Democrats (41 and 38 percent). Public opinion data and actual election results underscore the dominance of the more
conservative Republican Party in Texas during the past 20 years, but also reveal that dur-ing the presidency of Donald Trump (2016–2020), this dominance weakened a bit and Texas Democrats became somewhat more competitive. We examine these trends as well as the ideological and policy differences between these two political parties in greater depth in Chapter 5.
Public Policy Conservative opinions have been translated into most of Texas’s public policies. The state’s tax burden is low compared to other states, and the state proportionally devotes fewer financial resources to public services than most other states. Texas is known nationally for its low tax and limited government model that contrasts with the higher tax and more active government model seen in states like California and New York. Texas also has used the power of the state to enforce certain conservative social values. It
has, for instance, passed legislation to prohibit most abortions and to impose stiff penalties on lawbreakers. It also has maintained a ban on casino gambling (unlike its neighboring states) and has resisted efforts to decriminalize the retail sale and personal possession of marijuana. Subsequent chapters explore the myriad ways through which the state’s political culture
has influenced and continues to influence the design and implementation of public policy in a wide range of areas.

Texas Cultural Regions In his seminal study of Texas culture, D. W. Meinig found that the cultural diversity of Texas was more apparent than its homogeneity and that no unified culture had emerged from the various ethnic and cultural groups that settled Texas.4
He believed the “typical Texan”, like the

“average American”, did not exist, but was rather an oversimplification of the more distinctive social, economic, and political characteristics of the state’s inhabitants. Meinig viewed modern regional political culture as largely determined by migration pat-terns because people take their culture with them as they move geographically. Meinig believed that Texas (circa the 1960s) had evolved into nine fairly distinct cultural regions. However, whereas political boundaries are fixed, cultural divisions are often blurred and transitional. Figure 1.4 shows the nine most distinctive regions in Texas. The effects of mass media, the mobility of modern Texans statewide and beyond, and
immigration from abroad and from the other 49 states blur the cultural boundaries within Texas, with its bordering states, and with Mexico. Although limited because it does not take into account these modern-day realities, Meinig’s approach still provides a useful guide to a general understanding of Texas political culture based on geography and history

East Texas East Texas is a social and cultural extension of the Deep South. East Texas is primarily rural, with Tyler serving as its principal regional business, education and health care hub. Politics and commerce in many East Texas counties and cities are frequently dominated by
old Anglo families, whose wealth is usually based on real estate, banking, construction, and retail. Cotton—once “king” of agriculture in the region—has been replaced by cattle, poultry, and timber. As a result of the general lack of economic opportunity, young East Texans from cities like Longview and Palestine migrate to metropolitan areas, primarily Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston. Fundamentalist Protestantism dominates the region spiritually and permeates its political, social, and cultural activities.
The Gulf Coast Texas was effectively an economic colony before 1900—it sold raw materials to the industrialized North and bought northern manufactured products. Then, in 1901, a well struck oil at Spindletop, an oil field near Beaumont. The vicinity became known as the “Golden Triangle” as the oil generated both wealth and change in the entire state’s economy. Since the discovery of oil, the Gulf Coast has experienced almost continuous growth. In addition to being an industrial and petrochemical center, the Gulf Coast is one of the most important shipping hubs in the nation. Though volatile, the state’s petrochemical industry, which is concentrated on the Gulf
Coast, has experienced extraordinary growth, creating a boomtown psychology. Rapid growth fed real estate development and speculation throughout the region. The Houston area especially flourished, and Harris County (Houston) grew to become the third-most populous county in the United States, behind Los Angeles County in California and Cook County (Chicago) in Illinois. Today, Harris County has a population that is larger than that of 26 of the 50 states. Houston’s initial growth after World War II was fueled by a flood of job seekers from
East Texas and other rural areas of the state. This influx gave the Gulf Coast the flavor of rural Texas in an urban setting. Houston’s rural flavor diminished over the years as the U.S. economy transformed from industrial to postindustrial. This transformation brought large numbers of well-educated professionals to Houston from across the country and globe. Today, the Gulf Coast has become a remarkably vibrant and dynamic region, and Houston, the energy capital of the world, boasts many corporate headquarters along with the largest medical complex on earth (the Texas Medical Center). The Gulf Coast economy also serves as a pole for immigration from the Americas, Asia,
Europe, and Africa, which gives modern Houston an international culture comparable to that found in Los Angeles and New York. For example, the largest cricket facility in the United States, the Prairie View Cricket Complex, is located in the northwest Houston exurbs. The sport of cricket is very popular among the region’s Indian American and Pakistani American communities.
South Texas The earliest area settled by Europeans, South Texas developed a ranchero culture on the basis of livestock production that was similar to the feudal institutions in distant Spain. The ranchero culture is a quasi-feudal system whereby a property’s owner, or patrón, gives workers protection and employment in return for their loyalty and service. Creoles, who descended from Spanish immigrants, were the economic, social and political elite, whereas the first Texas cowboys who did the ranch work were Native Americans or Mestizos of mixed Spanish and Native American lineage. Anglo Americans first became culturally important in South Texas when they gained title to a large share of the land in the region following the Texas Revolution of 1836. However, modern South Texas still retains elements of the ranchero

culture, including some of its feudal aspects. Large ranches, often owned by one family for multiple generations, are prevalent; however, wealthy and corporate ranchers and farmers from outside the area are becoming common. Because of the semitropical South Texas climate, The Valley (of the Rio Grande, often
referred to as the Rio Grande Valley, or RGV) and the Winter Garden around Crystal City were developed into (and continue to be) major citrus-and vegetable-producing regions by migrants from the northern United States in the 1920s. These enterprises required intensive manual labor, which brought about increased immigration from Mexico.
Far West Texas Far West Texas, also known as the “Trans-Pecos region,” exhibits ele-ments of two cultures, possessing many of the same bicultural characteristics as South Texas. As is the case in South Texas, its large Mexican American population often maintains close ties with relatives and friends in Mexico. Far West Texas is a major commercial and social passageway between Mexico and the United
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) A treaty that has helped remove trade barriers among Canada, Mexico, and the United States and is an economic stimulus for the Texas Border because it is a conduit for much of the commerce with Mexico.
States. El Paso, the “capital” of Far West Texas and the sixth-largest city in the state, is a military, manufacturing, and commercial center. El Paso’s primary commercial partners are Mexico and New Mexico. While the rest of Texas is located in the Central Time Zone, El Paso County and adjacent Hudspeth County are in the Mountain Time Zone. The economy of the border cities of Far West Texas, like that of South Texas, is closely linked to Mexico and has benefited from the economic opportunities brought about by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a treaty that has helped remove trade barriers among Canada, Mexico, and the United States. NAFTA has served as an economic stimulus for the Texas Border because it is a conduit for much of the commerce with Mexico. More than three-quarters of U.S.–Mexico land trade crosses the border in Texas. In 2018, NAFTA was modified with the new agreement rebranded as the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA).
The Texas Border South and Far West Texas comprise the area known as the “Texas Border.” A corresponding “Mexico Border” includes the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas. It can be argued that the Texas Border and the Mexico Border are two parts of an economic, social, and cultural region with a substantial degree of similarity that sets it apart from the rest of the United States and of Mexico. The Border region, which is expanding in size both to the north and to the south, has a binational, bicultural, and bilingual subculture in which internationality is commonplace and economies and societies on both sides constantly interact.5 The Texas Border cities are closely tied to the Mexican economy on which their prosperity
maquiladoras Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ inexpensive Mexican labor for assembly and piecework.
depends. Although improving economically, these regions remain among the poorest in the United States. The economy of the Texas Border benefits economically from maquiladoras, which are Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ lower-cost Mexican labor for assembly and piecework. The Texas Border also serves as a major transshipment point for drug cartels as they bring
illegal drugs from Mexico to sell in the thriving U.S. market for illicit narcotics. In addition, a significant share of undocumented immigration into the United States occurs in the Texas Border region, making it the focus of a great deal of political attention.
Hill Country The Hill Country north and west of San Antonio was settled primarily by immigrants from Germany, but also by Czech, Polish, and Norwegian immigrants. Although the immigrants intermarried with Anglo Americans, Central European culture and archi-tecture were dominant well into the twentieth century. Skilled artisans were common in the towns; farms were usually moderate in size, self-sufficient, and family owned and operated.

culture, including some of its feudal aspects. Large ranches, often owned by one family for multiple generations, are prevalent; however, wealthy and corporate ranchers and farmers from outside the area are becoming common. Because of the semitropical South Texas climate, The Valley (of the Rio Grande, often
referred to as the Rio Grande Valley, or RGV) and the Winter Garden around Crystal City were developed into (and continue to be) major citrus-and vegetable-producing regions by migrants from the northern United States in the 1920s. These enterprises required intensive manual labor, which brought about increased immigration from Mexico.
Far West Texas Far West Texas, also known as the “Trans-Pecos region,” exhibits ele-ments of two cultures, possessing many of the same bicultural characteristics as South Texas. As is the case in South Texas, its large Mexican American population often maintains close ties with relatives and friends in Mexico. Far West Texas is a major commercial and social passageway between Mexico and the United
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) A treaty that has helped remove trade barriers among Canada, Mexico, and the United States and is an economic stimulus for the Texas Border because it is a conduit for much of the commerce with Mexico.
States. El Paso, the “capital” of Far West Texas and the sixth-largest city in the state, is a military, manufacturing, and commercial center. El Paso’s primary commercial partners are Mexico and New Mexico. While the rest of Texas is located in the Central Time Zone, El Paso County and adjacent Hudspeth County are in the Mountain Time Zone. The economy of the border cities of Far West Texas, like that of South Texas, is closely linked to Mexico and has benefited from the economic opportunities brought about by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a treaty that has helped remove trade barriers among Canada, Mexico, and the United States. NAFTA has served as an economic stimulus for the Texas Border because it is a conduit for much of the commerce with Mexico. More than three-quarters of U.S.–Mexico land trade crosses the border in Texas. In 2018, NAFTA was modified with the new agreement rebranded as the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA).
The Texas Border South and Far West Texas comprise the area known as the “Texas Border.” A corresponding “Mexico Border” includes the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas. It can be argued that the Texas Border and the Mexico Border are two parts of an economic, social, and cultural region with a substantial degree of similarity that sets it apart from the rest of the United States and of Mexico. The Border region, which is expanding in size both to the north and to the south, has a binational, bicultural, and bilingual subculture in which internationality is commonplace and economies and societies on both sides constantly interact.5 The Texas Border cities are closely tied to the Mexican economy on which their prosperity
maquiladoras Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ inexpensive Mexican labor for assembly and piecework.
depends. Although improving economically, these regions remain among the poorest in the United States. The economy of the Texas Border benefits economically from maquiladoras, which are Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ lower-cost Mexican labor for assembly and piecework. The Texas Border also serves as a major transshipment point for drug cartels as they bring
illegal drugs from Mexico to sell in the thriving U.S. market for illicit narcotics. In addition, a significant share of undocumented immigration into the United States occurs in the Texas Border region, making it the focus of a great deal of political attention.
Hill Country The Hill Country north and west of San Antonio was settled primarily by immigrants from Germany, but also by Czech, Polish, and Norwegian immigrants. Although the immigrants intermarried with Anglo Americans, Central European culture and archi-tecture were dominant well into the twentieth century. Skilled artisans were common in the towns; farms were usually moderate in size, self-sufficient, and family owned and operated.

North Texas experienced extraordinary population growth after World War II, with exten-sive migration from the rural areas of East, West, and Central Texas. The descendants of these migrants, after several generations, tend to have urban attitudes and behavior. Recent migra-tion from other states, especially from the North, has been significant. Many international corporations have established headquarters in North Texas, and their employees contribute to the region’s diversity and cosmopolitan environment. Although North Texas is more economically diverse than most other Texas regions, it does
rely heavily on banking, insurance, and the defense and aerospace industries. Electronic equip-ment, computer products, plastics, and food products are also produced in the region. North Texas’s economic diversity has allowed it to avoid or at least attenuate some of the boom–bust cycles experienced by other regions in the state where the economy is more dependent on a single industry or a smaller number of industries.
Central Texas Central Texas is often called the “Texas Triangle” because roughly trian-gular in shape, with its three corners being Houston, Dallas–Fort Worth, and San Antonio. The centerpiece of the region is Austin (Travis County), one of the fastest-growing metro-politan areas in the nation. Already a center of government and higher education, Austin has become the “Silicon Valley” of high-tech industries in Texas as well as an internationally recognized cultural center, whose annual South by Southwest Music, Film and Interactive Festival (SXSW) is now a global event. Austin’s rapid growth is a result of significant migration from the East and West Coasts,
as well as from various regions in Texas. The influx of highly educated people from outside Texas has added to the already substantial pool of accomplished Austinites. The cultural and economic traits of all the other Texas regions mingle here, with no single trait being dominant. Austin, though, stands out as an island of liberalism in a predominantly conservative state (see Figure 1.2).
Politics and Cultural Diversity
LO 1.3 Analyze Texans’ political struggles over equal rights and their impact on the state’s political future.
The politics of the state’s cultural regions have begun to lose their distinctive identities as Texas has become more metropolitan and economically and ethnically diverse. With this changing environment, a number of groups and individuals have endeavored to achieve greater cultural, political, social, and economic equality in the state.
Texans’ Struggle for Equal Rights Anglo male Texans initially resided atop the pyramid of status, wealth, and power in orga-nized Texas society. They wrote the rules of the game and used those rules to protect their position against attempts by women, African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans and members of the LGBTQ community to share in the fruits of full citizenship. Only after the disenfranchised groups organized and exerted political pressure against their governments did the doors of freedom and equality open enough for them to come inside.
Women Texans Women in the Republic of Texas could neither serve on juries nor vote, but unmarried women retained many of the rights that they had enjoyed under Span-ish law, which included control over their property. Married women retained some Spanish law benefits because, unlike under Anglo-Saxon law, Texas marriage law did not join the

married couple into one legal person with the husband as the head. Texas married women could own inherited property, share owner-ship in community property, and make a legal will. However, the husband had control of all the property, both separate and com-munity (including earned income), and an employer could not hire a married woman without her husband’s consent.6 Divorce laws were restrictive on both parties, but a husband
could win a divorce in the event of a wife’s “amorous or lascivi-ous conduct with other men, even short of adultery,” or if she had committed adultery only once. He could not gain a divorce for concealed premarital fornication. On the other hand, a wife could gain a divorce only if “the husband had lived in adultery with another woman.” Physical violence was not grounds for divorce unless the wife could prove a “serious danger” that might happen again. In practice, physical abuse was tolerated if the wife behaved
“indiscreetly” or “provoked” her husband. Minority and poor Anglo wives had little legal protection from beatings because the woman’s “station in life” and “standing in society” were also legal considerations.7 Governor James “Pa” Ferguson (1915–17) became an unwitting
catalyst for the women’s suffrage movement during the World War I period. Led by Minnie Fisher Cunningham, Texas suffragists orga-nized, spoke out, marched, and lobbied for the right to vote during the Ferguson Administration, but they were initially unable to gain political traction because of Ferguson’s opposition. When he became embroiled in political controversy over funding for the University of Texas, women joined in the groundswell of opposition. Suffragists effectively lobbied state legislators and organized rallies advocating Ferguson’s impeachment.8

National suffrage momentum precipitated a pro-posed constitutional amendment establishing the right of women to vote throughout the United States. Having endured more than five years of “heavy artillery” from Cunningham and the Texas Equal Suffrage Association, legislative opposition crumbled, and in June of 1919 Texas became one of the first southern states to ratify the Nine-teenth Amendment. Texas women received full voting rights in 1920.10 Women were given the right to serve on juries in 1954. Texas’s ratification of the proposed
Did You Know? In 1924 Miriam “Ma” Ferguson (spouse of James “Pa” Ferguson) became only the second woman in the United States to be elected governor. She remained the sole woman to be elected governor of Texas until Ann Richards in 1990.
national Equal Rights Amendment in 1972, the addition of a similar amendment to its own state constitution, and the passage of a series of laws titled the Marital Property Act amounted to major steps toward women’s equality and heralded the beginning of a more enlightened era in Texas. The Act granted married women equal rights in insurance, banking, real estate, contracts, divorce, child custody, and property rights. This was the first such comprehensive family law in the United States.1

Over the past thirty years, women have notably increased their presence in the corridors
of power in Texas. That said, the proportion of women in the state’s most powerful execu-tive and legislative positions still falls quite short of women’s share of the Texas population (50 percent). For instance, of the state’s five most populous counties and cities, only one of each, Harris County (Judge Lina Hidalgo) and the City of Fort Worth (Mayor Mattie Parker), had a female chief executive as of June 1, 2023. And, in the state’s U.S. House del-egation and in the Texas Legislature, women account for only 21 percent and 30 percent of the members, respectively.
African American Texans African Americans from other areas of the United States were brought to Texas as enslaved persons and served in that capacity until the end of the Civil War. They first learned of their freedom on June 19, 1865, a date commemorated annually at Juneteenth celebrations throughout the country, including Texas, where the day has been an official state holiday since 1980. During Reconstruction, African Americans both voted and held elective office (for example, 14 African Americans served in the Texas Legislature between 1870 and 1873), but the end of Reconstruction and Anglo opposition effectively ended African Americans’ political participation in the state. Civil rights were an increasingly elusive concept for ethnic and racial minorities following
Reconstruction. African Americans were legally denied the right to vote in the Democratic white primary, the practice of excluding African Americans from primary elections in the Texas Democratic Party. Schools and public facilities such as theaters, restaurants, beaches, and hospitals were legally segregated by race. Segregation laws were enforced by official law enforcement agents as well as by Anglo cultural norms and unofficial organizations using terror tactics. Although segregation laws were not usually formally directed at Latinos, who were legally white, such laws were effectively enforced against them as well. The white suprem-acist organization known as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), members of local law enforcement, and the Texas Rangers actively participated in violence and intimidation of both Latinos and African Americans to keep them “in their segregated place.” Lynching was also used against both groups, often after torture.12 The KKK was first organized in the late 1860s to intimidate freed African American
slaves. A modified, enlarged version was reborn in the 1920s with a somewhat altered mis-sion. The new Klan saw itself as a patriotic, Christian, fraternal organization for native-born white Protestants. Its members perceived a general moral decline in society, precipitated by
“modern” young people, and a basic threat to the Protestant white Christian “race.” Klansmen sensed a threat to their values from African Americans, Jews, Catholics, Latinos, German Americans, and other “foreigners.” The Klan used intimidation, violence, and torture that included hanging, tarring and feathering, branding, beating, and castration as means of coercion. As many as 80,000 Texans (which amounted to almost 10 percent of the adult Anglo male population at the time) may have joined the “invisible empire” in an effort to make the world more to their liking. Many elected officials—federal and state legislators as well as county and city officials—were either avowed Klansmen or friendly neutrals. In fact, the Klan influenced Texas society to such an extent that its power was a major political issue from 1921 through 1925.13 In response to this racially charged atmosphere, a number of organizations committed
to civil rights were founded or grew larger during the 1920s. These included the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), established in 1909, and the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), which was formed in Corpus Christi in 1929.


When Dr. L. H. Nixon, an African American from El Paso, was denied the right to vote
in the Democratic primary, the NAACP instituted legal action, and the U.S. Supreme Court found in Nixon v. Herndon (1927) that the Texas White Primary Law was unconstitutional. However, the Texas Legislature transferred control of the primary from the state to the execu-tive committee of the Texas Democratic Party, and the discrimination continued. Dr. Nixon again sought justice in the courts, and in 1931, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the new scheme was also unconstitutional. Texas Democrats then completely excluded African Americans from party membership. In Grovey v. Townsend (1935), the U.S. Supreme Court upheld this ploy, and the Texas Democratic primary remained an all-white organization. Although it had suffered a temporary setback in the episode, the NAACP had proven its potential as a viable instrument for African American Texans to achieve justice.14

In 1946, Heman Sweatt applied for admission to the
University of Texas Law School, which by Texas law was segregated (see Chapter 2). State laws requiring segrega-tion were constitutional as long as facilities serving Afri-can Americans and whites were equal. Because Texas had no law school for African Americans, the legislature hurriedly established a law school for Sweatt and, for his
“convenience,” located it in his hometown of Houston. Although officially established, the new law school lacked both faculty and a library and, as a result, the NAACP again sued the state. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that education at Sweatt’s new law school, in fact, was not equal to that of the University of Texas Law School and ordered him admitted to that institution. It is worth noting that “separate but equal” facilities remained legal after this case because the Court did not overturn Plessy v. Ferguson, which granted the constitutional sanction for legal segregation. Instead, the Court simply ruled that the new law school was not equal to that at the University of Texas.15
The U.S. Supreme Court did not finally outlaw
★ SRQ The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution says that no state shall deny any person the equal protection of the law. Why did the U.S. Supreme Court hold that state laws requiring racial segregation violated this provision?
segregation until the Brown v. Board ofEducation decision in 1954. The political and social fallout from the U.S. Supreme
Court’s Brown v. Board of Education (1954) public school desegregation decision did not bypass Texas. When the Mansfield Independent School District, just to the south-east of Fort Worth, was ordered to integrate in 1956, angry Anglos surrounded the school and prevented the enrollmen

of three African American children. Governor Allan Shivers declared the demonstration an “orderly protest” and sent the Texas Rangers to support the protestors. Because the administra-tion of President Dwight D. Eisenhower took no action, the school remained segregated. The Mansfield school desegregation incident “was the first example of failure to enforce a federal court order for the desegregation of a public school.”16
federal funding, did the Mansfield ISD finally desegregate. Federal District Judge William Wayne Justice in United States v. Texas (1970) ordered
the complete desegregation of all Texas public schools. The decision was one of the most extensive desegregation orders in history and included the process for executing the order in detail. The U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals largely affirmed Justice’s decision, but it refused to extend its provisions to Latino children.17 The 1960s are known for the victories of the national civil rights movement. Texan
James Farmer was cofounder of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and, along with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Whitney Young, and Roy Wilkins, was one of the “Big Four” African-American leaders who shaped the civil rights struggle in the 1950s and 1960s. Farmer, who followed the nonviolent principles of Mahatma Gandhi, initiated sit-ins as a means of integrating public facilities and freedom rides as a means of registering African Americans to vote. The first sit-in to protest segregated facilities in Texas was organized with CORE support by students from Wiley and Bishop Colleges. The students occupied the rotunda of the Harrison County Courthouse in the East Texas City of Marshall. The struggle for equality continues by, and on behalf of, African Americans in Texas. In
the aftermath of the death of former Houston resident George Floyd, an African American who was murdered by an Anglo Minneapolis police officer in May 2020 (see Image 1.3), calls for racial justice became louder in Texas as well as across the country and worldwide. In Texas, members of the Texas Legislative Black Caucus drafted the George Floyd Act,
which would have implemented widespread police reform including a ban on chokeholds and the abolishment of arrests for fine-only offenses like petty theft. Efforts intensified across the state to remove statues of Confederate soldiers from Texas parks and college campuses and to rename Texas parks, schools, and streets named after individuals who served in the Confederacy. And, the level of support for the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement increased in the state among all ethnic and racial groups, with two-fifths of Texans having a favorable view of BLM in June 2020 com-pared to 28 percent in October 2016, with the pro-portion of Anglos having a favorable view of BLM almost doubling from 18 percent to 35 percent.18 Although the BLM movement ultimately failed
to achieve its goals in Texas and the George Floyd Act did not pass in the Legislature, African Ameri-cans are now better represented in the corridors of power. For example, the mayors of the state’s two most populous cities, Sylvester Turner of Houston and Eric Johnson of Dallas, are both African Ameri-can. In both the U.S. House (13 percent) and the Texas Legislature (10 percent), African Americans hold a proportion of seats that is roughly comparable to the African American share of the Texas popula-tion (13 percent)

Latino Texans Like most African Americans, Latinos were relegated to the lowest-paid jobs as either service workers or farmworkers. The Raymondville Peonage Cases in 1929 tested for the first time the legality of forcing vagrants or debtors to work off debts and fines as labor on private farms. The practice violated federal statutes, but was common-place in some Texas counties. The Willacy County sheriff stated in his defense that Latinos often sought arrest to gain shelter and that “peonage was not an unknown way of life for them.” The trials resulted in the arrest and conviction of several public officials and private individuals. The outcome of the trials was unpopular in the agricultural areas and contrary to the generally accepted belief that farmers should have a means of collecting debts from individual laborers.19 World War II Latino veterans, newly returned to the state from fighting to make the
world safe for democracy, found discrimination still existed in their homeland. A decorated veteran, Major Hector Garcia, settled in Corpus Christi and became convinced by condi-tions in South Texas that still another war was yet to be fought on behalf of the region’s Latino community. Garcia, a medical doctor, found farm laborers enduring inhuman living conditions; disabled veterans starving, sick, and ignored by the Veterans Administration; and an entrenched, unapologetic Anglo culture that continued to impose public school segregation. To begin his war, Dr. Garcia needed recruits for his “army.” With other World War II
veterans, Dr. Garcia organized the American G.I. Forum in a Corpus Christi elementary school classroom in March 1948. This organization spread throughout the United States and played a major role in providing Latinos with equal rights and civil respect. One of the incendiary sparks that ignited Latinos in Texas to fight for civil rights was
Did You Know? In 2018, Veronica Escobar of El Paso and Sylvia Garcia of Houston became the first Texas Latinas ever to be elected to the U.S. House of Representatives.
Private Felix Longoria’s funeral. Longoria was a decorated soldier who died in combat in the Philippines during World War II. His body was returned in 1949 to the South Texas town of Three Rivers (midway between San Antonio and Corpus Christi) for burial in the “Mexican section” of the cemetery, which was separated from the “white section” by barbed wire. But an obstacle developed: the funeral home’s director refused the Longoria family’s request to use its chapel because “the whites won’t like it.” Longo-ria’s widow asked Dr. Garcia for support, but the funeral director also refused his request. Dr. Garcia then sent a flurry of telegrams and letters to Texas’s congressional delegation protesting the actions of the director. Then-Senator Lyndon B. Johnson immediately responded and arranged for Longoria to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery.20
The fight to organize labor unions was the primary focus for much of the Latino civil
activism in the 1960s and 1970s. In rural areas, large landowners controlled the political and economic systems and were united in their opposition to labor unions. The United Farm Workers (UFW) led a strike against melon growers and packers in Starr County in the 1960s, demanding a minimum wage and the resolution of other grievances. Starr County police offi-cers, the local judiciary, and the Texas Rangers were all accused of brutality as they arrested and prosecuted strikers for minor offenses. On February 26, 1977, members of the Texas Farm Workers Union (TFWU), strik-ers, and other supporters began a march to Austin to demand a $1.25 minimum wage and other improvements in working conditions for farmworkers. Press coverage intensified as the marchers slowly made their way north from the U.S.–Mexico border. Politicians, members of the American Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL–CIO),

and the Texas Council of Churches accompanied the protestors. Governor John Connally, who had refused to meet them in Austin, traveled to New Braunfels with House Speaker Ben Barnes and Attorney General Waggoner Carr to intercept the march and inform strikers that their efforts would have no effect. Ignoring the governor, the marchers continued to Austin and held a 6,500-person protest rally at the state capitol. The rally was broken up by the Texas Rangers and other law enforcement officers. The TFWU took legal action against the Rangers for their part in the repression of the rally. The eventual ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court held that the laws the Rangers had been enforcing were in violation of the U.S. Constitution. The Texas Rangers were subsequently reorganized and became a part of the Texas Department of Public Safety.21 One of the first successful legal challenges to segregated schools in Texas was
Delgado v. Bastrop ISD (1948). The suit by Gustavo C. (Gus) Garcia charged that Minerva Delgado and other Latino children were denied the same school facilities and educational instruction available to Anglos. The battle continued until segregated facilities were eventually prohibited in 1957 by the decision in Hernandez v. Driscoll Consolidated ISD.22 Important to Latinos and, ultimately, all others facing discrimination
was Hernandez v. State ofTexas (1954). An all-Anglo jury in the small town of Edna had convicted Pete Hernandez of murder in 1950. Attorneys Gus Garcia, Carlos Cadena, John Herrera, and James DeAnda challenged the conviction, arguing that the systematic exclusion of Latinos from jury duty in Texas violated Hernandez’s right to equal protection under the law guar-anteed by the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Texas courts had historically ruled that Latinos were white, so excluding them from all-Anglo (white) juries could not be legal discrimination. To change the system, the Latino team of lawyers would have to change the interpretation of the U.S. Constitution. The stakes were high. If they failed, Latino discrimination throughout the southwestern United States might legally continue for years. Garcia argued before the U.S. Supreme Court that Latinos, although white, were “a class apart” and suffered discrimination on the basis of their “class.” The U.S. Supreme Court agreed, overturned the Texas courts, and ruled that Latinos were protected by the Constitution from discrimination by other whites. The Hernandez decision established the precedent of constitutional protection by class throughout the United States and was an early forerunner of future decisions (see Table 1.1) prohibiting discrimination by gender, dis-ability, and sexual orientation.23 Texas Latinos today do not experience the same degree of discrimination
19
Image 1.4 Gus Garcia, legal advisor for the American G.I. Forum, is shown during a visit to the White House. Garcia was the lead attorney in the U.S. Supreme Court decision Hernandez v. Texas, 347 U.S. 475 (1954).Review the Latino rights movement at https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=dz fdINufpSE.
as African Americans, but they do suffer significantly more discrimination than Anglos. Much of the discrimination felt by Latinos in Texas results from rhetoric and policies that primarily target recent immigrants from Latin America but are nonetheless seen by a majority of Latinos as being anti-Latino in focus, tenor, and impact. Examples include election reforms that have disproportionately affected the Latino commu-nity, continuing efforts to deport Latino undocumented immigrants, and the inhumane treat-ment suffered by Latino immigrants in detention facilities along the Texas–Mexico border. Latino representation in the corridors of power in Texas has increased over the past two
decades. For instance, the state’s most populous county, Harris County, has since 2019 been run by a Latina, County Judge Lina Hidalgo. Likewise, the state’s sixth most populous city

El Paso, is run by a Latino, Mayor Oscar Leeser. Despite these gains, Latino representa-tion still lags well below the community’s share of the Texas population (40 percent). For example, Latinos hold proportions of Texas U.S. House seats (18 percent) and of Texas Legislature seats (24 percent) that are far below the 40 percent of the state’s population accounted for by Latinos.
Asian American Texans The Asian American population in Texas was, up until the last 40 years, very small. Even as late as 1980, Asian Americans accounted for less than 1 percent of the Texas population. Today however, 6 percent of Texans identify as Asian American and Asian Americans are projected to account for one in ten Texans by 2050, with this rapid population growth fueled to a considerable extent by immigration. The first Asian immigrants in Texas were from China
Did You Know? In 1964 Thomas J. Lee became the first Asian American state legislator in Texas history. Lee was born in China and immigrated to the United States when he was eight. He served one term (1965–67) in the Texas House representing Bexar County (San Antonio).
and worked on railroads across the state in the late 1800s. They were followed by a small group of Chinese immigrants who had assisted General John Pershing in his unsuccessful raids to capture Pancho Villa in Mexico in 1917 and were brought by Pershing to San Antonio due to his fear that they would be harmed were they to stay in Mexico. Due to the nationwide Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 however, the Chinese population in Texas remained minute until the Act was repealed in 1943, but even as late as 1980, still num-bered only 25,000.
The end of the Vietnam War in 1975 with the fall of Saigon and the collapse of the
Republic of South Vietnam (see Image 1.5) resulted in a substantial influx of Vietnamese refugees escaping the North Vietnamese Communist regime into Texas during the second half of the 1970s. The 1980 Census revealed that Texas had more Vietnamese residents than every state other than California, with an especially large concentration of Vietnamese immigrants in the Houston region.
The most recent noteworthy wave of Asian
Image 1.5 This Vietnam War Memorial is located in Houston’s Little Saigon neighborhood. It depicts a South Vietnamese soldier and an American solider fighting side by side, and is flanked by the flags of the United States, the Republic of South Vietnam, and Texas.
migration to Texas has come from India and Pakistan. Immigration from these two coun-tries in South Asia has increased in the past two decades and many of these migrants have settled in the Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston regions. A majority of Indian Americans practice the Hindu religion, but significant numbers are Mus-lims, as are most Pakistani immigrants. Together, Islamic Texans of Indian and Pakistani descent constitute one of the largest Muslim communities in the United States. In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks, discrimination, violence, and vandalism were directed against the state’s Indian Americans of all faiths, as well as Pakistani Ameri-cans and other peoples of the Islamic religion. In the past two decades, these incidents of prejudice have dissipated somewhat, but they have not dis-appeared. In fact, an August 2022 Texas Politics Project survey found that more than two-thirds of Texans believe that Muslims suffer either a lot or

some discrimination. Hate crimes directed at individual Muslims frequently occur in Texas, and in recent years mosques in the Austin, Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston metro regions have been vandalized. Today, the Texas Asian American population is highly diverse in regard to the country
from which these Texans or their parents, grandparents or great grandparents immigrated. The national origin of 32 percent of Texas Asian Americans is Indian, 19 percent Vietnam-ese, 15 percent Chinese, 8 percent Filipino, 6 percent Pakistani, 5 percent Korean, 3 percent Nepalese and 2 percent Japanese, with the remaining 10 percent of Texas Asian Americans spread across more than a dozen different national origin groups.24 While statewide Asian Americans account for 6 percent of the Texas population, three
counties have a proportion of Asian American residents that is considerably higher than the state average: Fort Bend County southwest of Houston (22 percent), Collin County north of Dallas (18 percent), and Denton County north of Fort Worth (11 percent). Asian American representation in the corridors of power has never been higher in
Texas than it is today. There are six Asian American state representatives (two Repub-licans and four Democrats), up from a previous record of four during the 2021-23 leg-islative session, and in 2023 includes the first two Muslims to ever serve in the Texas Legislature (Pakistani Americans Salman Bhojani of Tarrant County and Suleman Lalani of Fort Bend County). There are no Asian American Texas state senators or members of Congress, with Asian Americans overall holding 3 percent of the seats in the Texas Legislature.
In addition, Indian American KP George is serving his second term as Fort
Bend County Judge (see George’s essay on his role as county judge in Chapter 11) and Japanese American Peter Sakai is serving his first term as Bexar County Judge, meaning that two of Texas’s ten most populous counties have an Asian American chief executive, as does its second most populous city, San Antonio (Mayor Ron Nirenberg).
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Texans Discrimina-tion against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer Texans has long been commonplace in Texas. Furthermore, state law has criminalized certain intimate sexual conduct by two persons of the same sex. In 1998, a Harris County sheriff’s deputy discovered
two men having intimate sexual contact in a private resi-dence, and the men were arrested and convicted for vio-lating a Texas anti-sodomy statute. Their conviction was appealed and eventually reached the U.S. Supreme Court in the case Lawrence v. Texas. In Justice Anthony Ken-nedy’s majority opinion, he stated that the Texas law vio-lated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which does not protect sodomy, but does protect personal relationships and the ability to have those relationships without fear of punishment or criminal classification. The Texas statute intended to control the most intimate of all human activity, sexual behavior, in the most private of places, the home. The Lawrence decision simultaneously invalidated sodomy, laws in thirteen other states, thereby protecting same-sex behavior in every state and territory in the United States. The right to marry was until recently the frontline of the LGBTQ battle for equal
Did You Know? In 2019, the Texas Legislature’s first LGBTQ Caucus was formed by five women representatives: Celia Israel, Jessica González, Mary González, Julie Johnson, and Erin Zwiener.
21
rights, with this battle complicated by the 1996 federal Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA). DOMA defined marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman and further stipu-lated that the federal government would not recognize same-sex marriages for purposes of benefits such as Social Security, veterans’ benefits, and income tax filings.25 the U.S. Supreme Court decided the case United States v. Windsor, in which it held that

Legislature passed a bill that prohibits transgender girls from participating in public school athletic competi-tion in sports that are designated for biological females, a policy that was extended to sports at Texas public colleges and universities during the 2023 legislative session. In 2023, the Texas Legislature also passed a bill that prohibits medical professionals from providing puberty blockers, hormone therapy, and surgical inter-vention to children under the age of 18 for the purpose of altering the child’s biological characteristics to align with their gender identity.
Population Diversity Today Demographics are population characteristics, such as age, gender, ethnicity or race, employment, and income, that social scientists use to describe groups in society; in Texas, these characteristics are rapidly changing. Texas is one of the fastest-growing states in the nation and is becoming more culturally diverse as immigrants from other nations and migrants from other states continue to find it a desirable place to call home. U.S. Census data and population estimates by the
Texas State Demographer underscore how the state has become much more ethnically and racially diverse over the past 40 years. Figure 1.6 shows the breakdown of Texans for 1980 as 66 percent Anglo, 21 percent Latino, 12 percent African American, and less than 1 percent other. During the course of the next four decades, the share of the Texas population accounted for by Anglos progressively declined and the share accounted for by Latinos and Asian Americans progressively rose, with the proportion of African Americans remaining roughly the same. In 2022, Latinos and Anglos each accounted for 40 percent of Texans, with the proportion of Latinos steadily increasing and the proportion of Anglos steadily decreasing. Lastly, between 1990 and 2020 the Asian American share of the Texas population tripled from 2 to 6 percent. Voter participation in Texas is comparatively quite low (see Chapter 4). Furthermore,
★ CTQ Why do younger and older Texans have notably different opinions about same-sex marriage?
Latino political participation is low even by Texas standards. Given the growing share of eligible voters accounted for by Latinos, if Latinos begin to participate at the same rates as African Americans and Anglos, it could have a dramatic impact on the tenor and substance of politics and public policy in the Lone Star State. Equally important, changes in the ethnic and racial makeup of the state’s population will
present decision makers with enormous challenges. Figure 1.7 shows that income inequality parallels ethnic and racial divisions in Texas. Poverty rates are higher and overall incomes are lower among African Americans and Latinos compared to Anglos and Asian Americans. Lower incomes are associated with more limited educational opportunity, inadequate access to health care, and much less robust participation in the state’s civic life. Poverty drives up the cost of state social services and can contribute to crime and familial dysfunction. How Texas adapts to the state’s changing demographics is likely to be the focus of political controversy for years to come

Applying What You Have Learned about Texas Political Culture
LO 1.4 Apply what you have learned about Texas political culture and diversity.
In this chapter, you briefly learned about the struggle of African Americans for equality. Much of the early struggle focused on the constitutional rights to equal treatment under the law and the right to vote. That struggle still continues as Black Texans are treated unequally by some police officers and governments maintain Confederate symbols of oppression in the public square. Other Texans believe the campaign against these symbols is an effort to erase history. So, we asked Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson to explain the cultural background of these symbols so Texans can better understand the motivations of those protesting them. Eric Johnson was first elected Mayor of Dallas in 2019 and was reelected for a second term
in 2023. Underscoring Johnson’s popularity, he was unopposed in his reelection bid, the first time in more than 50 years that a Dallas mayor has not faced any challengers. He is a former member of the Texas House of Representatives, where he represented Dallas from 2010 to 2019. During his tenure in the Texas House, Mayor Johnson served on 20 prominent legisla-tive committees and as the Chairman of the Dallas Area Legislative Delegation. After you have read the mayor’s article, you will be asked to explain the “Lost Cause”
narrative, why it is inaccurate, and why descendants of enslaved persons would find Confed-erate symbols offensive.

O 1.1 Analyze the relationships among Texas political culture, its politics, and its public policies. A political culture reflects people’s political values and beliefs. It explains how people feel about their government—their expectations of what powers it should have over their lives and what services it should provide. The generally conservative ideological position of Texans
masks some notable subgroup differences based on gender, ethnicity and race, generational cohort, and geography. For example, men are on average more conservative than women and Anglos are more conservative than both Latinos and especially African Americans. At the same time, members of Generation Z are notably more liberal than Texans in other generational cohorts, especially Baby Boomers and those belonging to the Silent Generation, and residents of Travis County are significantly more liberal than residents of the state’s other populous counties. Texans’ predominantly conservative political culture is
reflected in the state’s conservative public policies. Republicans control state political institutions and have enacted low tax and spending policies and conservative policies on social issues such as abortion and sexual orientation.
LO 1.2 Differentiate the attributes that describe the major regions of Texas. Texas can be divided into a series of political cultural regions with differing characteristics and traditions: (1) East Texas, (2) the Gulf Coast, (3) South Texas, (4) Far West Texas, (5) the Hill Country, (6) West Texas, (7) the Panhandle, (8) North Texas, and (9) Central Texas. Each region is characterized by distinctive historical, ethnic, and economic influences.
LO 1.3 Analyze Texans’ political struggles over equal rights and their impact on the state’s political future. Texas social conservatism inherited from the Old South traditionalistic culture has resulted in resistance to demands for gender, racial, social, and political equality. In several instances, groups have succeeded in their struggles for equality by appealing to the federal courts outside of the political control of Texas political institutions. Women were not legally equal to men in early Texas, and their
path to equality has been a winding and occasionally delayed one. Activists finally won the long battle for the right to vote in 1918. It

was not until 1972, however, that women won equal rights in real estate, contracts, divorce, child custody, and property rights. African American Texans’ struggle for legal equality
reflected similar struggles being simultaneously waged in other southern states. The battle to vote in the Democratic primary and the right of access and admission to public accommodations and public schools were settled only by national courts or congressional intervention. The Latino struggle in Texas was similar to that of African
Americans and was resolved only by national action. Several Latino rights organizations were founded in Texas, and the judicial decision in Hernandez v. Texas (1954) that established the constitutional concept of a “class apart” became important throughout the United States. Until the last quarter of the twentieth century, Asian Americans
accounted for less than 1 percent of the Texas population. Fueled in large part by immigration from countries such as India, Vietnam, and China, today 6 percent of Texans are of Asian American descent. LGBTQ Texans are now waging similar battles for legal
equality. Lawrence v. Texas (2003) gained national significance by decriminalizing sexual activity between consenting persons of the same biological sex. Later Supreme Court decisions legalized same-sex marriages and prohibited discrimination against LGBTQ persons. A high-profile series of battles for LGBTQ equality is presently taking place throughout the state over the rights of transgender persons. In 2022, the Latino population surpassed the Anglo population,
making Texas a Latino plurality state. Increased political clout can come with increased population, and Latinos could begin to challenge the political and economic dominance of Anglos. Regardless of the political outcome of population shifts, Texas is becoming more diverse and now has an opportunity to build on its already rich cultural pluralism. LO 1.4 Apply what you have learned about Texas political culture and diversity. You learned about the controversy about Confederate monuments and how they were erected to resurrect the honor of the Confederates by promoting a dubious “Lost Cause” narrative. You learned why the descendants of enslaved persons find these symbols of oppression and the cultural myths surrounding them to be offensive


