59 - 76



For this assignment, you will need to read chapter 3 in your text. What I am looking for in this assignment is for you to become the instructor for chapter 3 and do a power point presentation that would help others learn the important facts about chapter 3 (as well as why this is important). You need to have at least 10 slides (i.e- ten important facts) and a final slide that summarizes the chapter overall.

T
he real character of a government is determined less by the provisions of its constitution than by the hearts and minds of its citizens. Government is a process of decision-making
conditioned by its history, its people, and the political influence exerted by citizens, interest groups, and political parties. Nevertheless, our national, state, and local governments would be vastly different were
it not for their constitutions. Although the exact meaning of constitutional provisions may be disputed, there is general agreement that constitutions should be respected as the legal basis controlling the fundamentals of government decision making. Constitutions serve as a rationalization for the actions of legislatures, executives, and courts—and of the people themselves. Indeed, the very idea of having a written constitution has become part of the political culture—the basic system of political beliefs in the United States. Constitutions establish major governing institutions, assign them power, and place both
legitimacy General public acceptance of the government’s “right to govern.”
implicit and explicit limits on the power they have assigned. They give governments a legal basis for existing and, because Americans respect constitutions, they promote legitimacy—the general public acceptance of the government’s “right to govern.”
Texas Constitutions in History
LO 3.1 Explain the origins of the Texas Constitution and the Constitutional Convention of 1875.
Like all constitutions, the first Texas constitutions reflected the interests and concerns of the people who wrote and amended them. Many of their elements paralleled those of existing state constitutions; others were at the time unique to the Lone Star State.
homesteads Owner-occupied
properties protected from forced sale under most circumstances.
community property Property acquired during marriage and owned equally by both spouses.
common law Law developed from judicial rulings and customs over time.
Early Texas Constitutions The constitution of the Texas Republic and the first state constitution of Texas were products of the plantation culture of Anglo Protestant slaveholders. These early constitutions adopted some institu-tions from Texans’ experiences during Spanish and Mexican rule and forthrightly rejected others.
Republic of Texas Constitution The first Texas Constitution after independence from Mexico was written in 1836 for the Republic of Texas. In reaction to the prominent influ-ence of the Catholic Church during Mexican rule, the largely Protestant Texans wrote a consti-tution with careful separation of church and state, forbidding clergy of any faith from holding office. Opposing Mexico’s antislavery policies, Texans made it illegal for an individual to free the people they enslaved without the consent of the Republic’s congress and denied citizenship to descendants of Africans and Native Americans. Remembering the abuses of the dictatorial Mexican military and political leader Antonio López de Santa Anna, Texans limited the terms of their presidents to three years and prohibited them from being elected to consecutive terms. The Republic of Texas Constitution did actually adopt some provisions from Spanish and
Did You Know? In the early nineteenth Century, common law traditions elsewhere in the United States allowed abortions until the “quickening,” when the fetus could be felt moving in the womb about 15 to 20 weeks into the pregnancy, but Texas continued to follow Spanish/Mexican traditions by outlawing abortions.1
Mexican laws. It recognized homesteads, owner-occupied properties protected from forced sale under most circumstances. It also enshrined the concept of community property, which means that property acquired during marriage is owned equally by both spouses. These elements of Mexican law would later be absorbed into Ameri-can political culture as other
states adopted similar
provisions. Still, the Republic’s constitution was mostly a product of
the political culture of the Anglo American southern planters. It incorporated English common law, developed from judi-cial rulings and customs over time. The Texas Constitution

also lifted many provisions almost word for word from the U.S. Constitution and from the constitutions of southern states like Tennessee from which many Texas settlers had migrated. Acting in haste because of the fear of attack from the Mexican cavalry, the Republic’s con-stitutional convention wrote a concise document establishing a unitary form of government, free of many of the detailed restrictions that would later come to limit Texas government.
Constitution of 1845 Texans wrote a new constitution in 1845 in preparation for the state’s admission to the United States. Although the 1845 Constitution contained many provi-sions similar to the Republic’s constitution, it also introduced features recognizable in today’s state constitution. For example, it was almost twice as long as the Republic of Texas Constitution and restricted the power of the legislature, which was allowed to meet in regular session only once every two years. The statehood constitution reflected the anti-corporate sentiment of the Old South as it required a two-thirds vote in the Texas House of Representatives to establish any corporation and made bank corporations illegal altogether. It limited state debt to $100,000 except in cases of war, insurrection, or invasion, and it established the Permanent School Fund. The one and only amendment ever adopted to the 1845 Constitution served to limit the power
of the governor by providing for the election of some of the officers that governors previously were allowed to appoint. Before adoption of the amendment, Texas had a short ballot because the governor had the power to appoint most executive and judicial officers. The amendment produced a long ballot, which results from the independent election of a large number of state officials.
Constitution of 1861 When Texans voted by more than 3 to 1 to secede from the Union, they put the slaveholding planter class and its allies in firm control of the state, which removed unionist Sam Houston from the governorship and wrote the Constitution of 1861. The state’s Confederate-era constitution was basically the same as that of 1845, except that it reflected the poi-gnant reality that Texas had become one of the Confederate states at war with the United States—it increased the debt ceiling and absolutely prohibited the emancipation of any enslaved person.
Reconstruction Constitutions and Their Aftermath
Although earlier constitutions contained a number of elements still found in today’s Texas Constitution, it was the aftermath of the Civil War—the political reaction to Reconstruc-tion—that affirmed Texans’ distaste for government and set the stage for the writing of today’s state constitution.
Constitution of 1866 After the Civil War, a coalition of white Democrats and moderate Republicans wrote the 1866 Constitution, which they thought would satisfy the unionists and permit the readmission of Texas under President Andrew Johnson’s mild Recon-struction program. This document nullified secession, abolished slavery, and renounced Con-federate war debts. Under its terms, a civilian government was elected and operated for several months, imposing racial segregation, outlawing interracial marriage, passing strict vagrancy laws, and enacting Black Codes, which were special laws essentially designed to reimpose slavery-like conditions on formerly enslaved persons through long-term apprenticeship and contract labor mandates. The U.S. Congress reacted to racist laws and oppressive conditions in the rebellious states
by passing the Reconstruction Act of 1867 that outlined the required conditions for southern states to be readmitted into the Union. This enactment resulted in deposing of Texas’s civilian elected officials and effectively restoring military rule until the state adopted the following: universal manhood suffrage as a form of voting rights for nonwhites, guaranteed formerly enslaved persons the equal protection of the laws, and the adoption of the Fourteenth Amend-ment to the U.S. Constitution.

military leaders did finally call for an election to write a new state constitution and
restore civilian control, most White Democrats either were disfranchised or else they boycotted it, and a largely nonwhite and Republican electorate selected delegates to the constitutional convention in 1868.
Image 3.1 E. J. Davis remained loyal to the United States, and, as a brigadier general, he was among those who accepted the final surrender of Confederate forces in Texas. His service in the Union army was a bitter reminder of Texas’s defeat in the Civil War.
Constitution of 1869 The convention produced a document that centralized state power in the hands of the governor, lengthened the chief executive’s term to four years, and allowed the governor to appoint all major state officers, including judges. It provided annual legislative sessions, weakened planter-controlled local government, and centralized the public-school system. The convention in 1868 reflected little of the fear of centralized government power that was later to become the hallmark of Texas government. The proposed constitution was ratified in 1869, and E. J. Davis was elected governor. Davis used the power granted under the constitution to pursue
activist government policies to protect civil rights, enforce law and order, modernize transportation, and expand education. Governor Davis, who was personally committed to equal rights and full citi-zenship for African Americans, took state control of voter registra-tion to prevent local governments from denying them the right to vote. When criminal gangs and Klan organizations began targeting unionists and former slaves with impunity from local governments, Governor Davis and the Legislature established a state police force to restore order, enforce state law, and suppress rebellions in several East Texas counties. The Legislature made significant grants to the rail-roads to help develop the Texas economy, resulting in the most lasting legacy of the Davis Administration. Governor Davis also embarked on a massive effort to expand public schools, enabling them to enroll a remarkable number of students for the day. Perhaps some of these policies would have been considered impor-★ CTQ How did resentment against Governor Davis lead to the writing of the current Texas Constitution?
tant achievements in a different political climate, but most White Texans regarded them as abusive and considered the 1869 Constitu-tion as the instrument of an oppressive government that overturned their pre–Civil War power structure along with its customs of slav-ery and white dominance. They resented the efforts to grant voting and citizenship rights to formerly enslaved persons and abhorred the activities of the state police, which included a large contingent of Afri-can Americans. They regarded the ambitious programs to subsidize railroads and to establish a state system of public education as wasteful and extravagant; many Texans refused to pay what they considered exorbitant taxes, and the state government accumulated what was for that time a massive public debt. Meanwhile, the state police and militia failed to maintain the peace on the western frontier and much of the state’s population fell prey to outlaws. After the 1873 election, in which Democrat Richard Coke defeated
Davis by a 2-to-1 margin, Davis’s handpicked state supreme court used
the placement of a semicolon in the state constitution as a pretext for invalidating the election. Davis wired President Ulysses S. Grant to send federal troops to prevent Democrats from taking power. Grant refused, and Davis set up a legendary standoff barricading himself on the first floor of the capitol surrounded by loyal state police and militiamen when Democrats slipped past guards and gathered in the legislative chambers to form the new government, setting the stage to write a new state constitution.
Although earlier constitutions contained a number of elements still found in today’s Texas
Constitution, it was the aftermath of the Civil War—the political reaction to Reconstruction—that affirmed Texans’ fear of government and shaped today’s state constitution

The Constitutional Convention of 1875 Voters approved a referendum to elect a constitutional convention to write a new constitution to replace the one that had made the Davis Administration possible. The election was dominated by a new farmers’ organiza-tion, the Texas Grange, which had been organized in 1873. Opposing railroad interests and high taxes, the Grangers campaigned on a platform of “retrenchment and reform” and man-aged to elect at least 40 of its members to the constitutional convention of 1875. Like most of the 90 delegates, they were Democrats who were determined to strike at the heart of the big government associated with the Reconstruction Era. To save money, the convention did not publish a journal—reflecting the frugal tone of the
final constitution. The convention cut salaries for governing officials, placed strict limits on property taxes, and restricted state borrowing; it also was miserly with the power it granted government officials. It stripped most of the governor’s powers, reduced the term of office from four to two years, and required that the attorney general and state judges be elected by voters rather than appointed by the governor. Nor did the legislature escape pruning by the convention. Regular legislative sessions were
to be held only once every two years. Legislative procedure was detailed in the constitution, with severe restrictions placed on the kinds of policies the legislature might enact. In fact, a number of public policies were written into the constitution itself. Local government was strengthened, and counties were given many of the administrative
and judicial functions of the state. Although the Grangers had opposed the idea of public education, they were persuaded to permit it with the condition that local governments would establish segregated schools. The 1875 convention largely reacted to state Reconstruction policies by constraining state
power. When the convention ended, some of the money appropriated for its expenses remained unspent. Despite opposition from African Americans, Republicans, most cities, and railroad interests, voters ratified the current state Constitution of 1876.
The Texas Constitution Today
LO 3.2 Analyze the major constitutional structures, functions, and limits of Texas’s legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
Many students begin their examination of state constitutions with some kind of ideal or model constitution in mind. Comparisons with this ideal then leave them with the feeling that if only this or that provision were changed, state government would somehow find its way to honesty, efficiency, and effectiveness. In truth, there is no ideal constitution that would serve well in each of the unique 50 states, nor is it possible to write a state constitution that could permanently meet the dynamically changing needs and concerns of its citizens. Furthermore, because a government is much more than its constitution, honest and effective government must be commanded by the political environment—leaders, citizens, parties, interest groups, and so forth; constitutions cannot guarantee it. Scoundrels will be corrupt and unconcerned citizens apathetic under even the best constitution. However, this pragmatic view of the role of state constitutions should not lead to the conclusion
that they are only incidental to good government. A workable constitution is necessary for effective government even if it is not sufficient to guarantee it. Low salaries may discourage independent and high-caliber leaders from seeking office or lead to potential conflicts of interest if public officials are forced to supplement their incomes from outside sources. Constitutional restrictions may make it virtually impossible for government to meet the changing needs of its citizens, and institutions may be set up in such a way that they will operate inefficiently and irresponsibly. The events preceding the adoption of the 1876 Texas Constitution did not provide the background for developing a constitution capable of serving well under the pressures and
changes that would take place in the century to follow. The decade of the 1870s was an era of paranoia and reaction, and the constitution it produced was directed more toward solving the concerns arising from Reconstruction than toward meeting the challenges of generations to follow—it was literally a reactionary document. The current Texas Constitution is also an expansive document, approximately 100,000
words in length. Twelve times longer than the U.S. Constitution, the Texas constitution is the second longest in the 50 states, bested only by the gargantuan Alabama Constitution.
Bill of Rights and Fundamental Liberty Although the Texas Constitution has been the target of much criticism, it contains a Bill of Rights (Article 1) that is often held in high regard because it reflects basic American political culture and contains provisions that are similar to those found in other state charters and the U.S. Constitution. The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides that no state shall deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. As the U.S. Supreme Court has interpreted this Amendment, it has ruled that states must respect most of the U.S. Bill of Rights because its provisions are essential to “liberty” and “due process.” As a result, many individual rights are protected by both the state and federal courts. If the state courts fail to protect an individual’s rights, that person can also then seek a remedy in the federal courts. Table 3.1 shows important basic rights protected by both the U.S. and Texas constitutions.
Yet state constitutional guarantees are not redundant, because the U.S. Constitution
establishes only minimum standards for the states. Texas’s courts have interpreted some state constitutional provisions to broaden basic rights beyond these minimums. Although the U.S. Supreme Court refused to interpret the Fourteenth Amendment as guaranteeing equal public school funding,2
the Texas Supreme Court interpreted the
statutory law Law passed by legislatures and written into books of code.
efficiency clause of the Texas Constitution (Article 7, Section 1) as requiring greater equity in public schools.3
By using Texas’s constitutional and statutory law (law passed
by legislatures and written into books of code), Texas courts have struck down poly-graph tests for public employees, required workers’ compensation for farmworkers, expanded free speech rights of private employees, and affirmed free speech rights at privately owned shopping malls. The Texas Bill of Rights guarantees additional rights not specifically mentioned in the U.S.
writ of habeas corpus A court order to
present a person and show the legal cause for confining the individual; it may result in a prisoner’s release from unlawful detention.
Constitution. Notably, Texas has adopted an amendment to prohibit discrimination based on sex. A similar guarantee was proposed as the Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitu-tion, but it was not ratified by the states. The Texas Constitution also guarantees victims’ rights and access to public beaches. It forbids imprisonment for debt or committing the men-tally ill for an extended period without a jury trial. It also prohibits monopolies and absolutely forbids suspending the writ of habeas corpus, which is a court order to present a person and show the legal cause for confining the individual; it may result in a prisoner’s release from unlawful detention. Article 16 protects homesteads and prohibits the garnishment of wages except for court-ordered child support. The Texas Bill of Rights and other provisions guaran-tee the average citizen a greater variety of protections than most other state constitutions. We discuss Texans’ basic rights extensively in Chapter 10.
separation of powers The principle behind the concept of a government in which power is distributed among three different branches—legislative, executive, and judicial.
Separation of Powers Like the state bill of rights, Article 2 of the Texas Constitution limits government. To prevent the concentration of power in the hands of any single institution, the national government and all state governments, at the very least, have provided for a separation of powers among three branches of government—legislative, executive, and judicial. The function of the legislative branch is to make laws, and it is by law that governments define crime, establish the basis of civil suits, determine what will be taxed and who will pay how much in taxes, and set up government programs and the agencies that administer them. The function of the executive branch is to carry out the law, arrest criminals, collect taxes, provide public services, hire government employees, and supervise their day-to-day conduct. The function of the judicial branch is to interpret the law as it applies to individuals and institutions. Despite the separation of powers, there is still the potential for any of these three branches
checks and balances
The concept that each branch of government is assigned power to limit abuses by the others.
to abuse whatever powers they have been given. The Texas Constitution also follows American tradition in subsequent constitutional articles: it sets up a system of checks and balances, the concept that each branch of government is assigned power to limit abuses by the others. Table 3.2 illustrates that, under certain circumstances, a function normally assigned to one branch of government can be influenced by another. For example, the veto power that deals with lawmaking (a legislative function) is given to the governor (an executive). Impeachment and conviction, which deal with determining guilt (a judicial function), are given to the legislature. The state senate (a house of the legislature) confirms appointments the governor makes in the executive branch. Although there is a separation of powers, the checks-and-balances system requires that each branch have the opportunity to influence the others. The three branches specialize in separate functions, but there is some sharing of powers as well. In Chapters 7, 8, and 9, you will see how extensively these three branches of govern-ment interact in practice.


Legislative Branch The legislative article (Article 3) is by far the longest in the Texas Constitution. As is the case at the federal level and in 49 states, the Texas Constitution provides for a bicameral, two-house legislative body made up of the 31-member Senate and the 150-member House of Representatives, both of which must approve proposed legislation in order for it to become law. Among the states, only Nebraska has a unicameral, one-house, legislature. The 1876 Constitution raised the number of senators to 31 and representatives to 93, with
the provision that the size of the House could increase as the state’s population grew, but only up to a maximum of 150 representatives. Following the drafting of the 1876 Constitu-tion and the 1880 census, each senator represented an average of 51,000 people and each representative represented an average of 17,000. Today, the average is about 11 times more people (195,000) per representative and 18 times more (941,000) per senator than when the constitution was written. Senators are elected for a four-year term from single-member districts. One-half of the body
is elected in one general election and the other half in the next, except after redistricting, when all senators stand for election at the same time. Each senator must be at least 26 years old, be a citizen, and be a resident of the state for at least five years and of the district for one year. Representatives are elected for a two-year term with the entire house elected every two years. Each representative must be at least 21 years old, a citizen, and a resident of the state for two years and of the district for one yea

As in most states, Texas legislators may serve as many times as voters choose to elect
them; the longest-serving member of the Texas Legislature, Representative Tom Craddick of Midland, has served in the legislature continuously since 1969. In contrast, some 15 states limit the number of consecutive terms legislators may serve or the total number of terms they may serve during their lifetime. The Texas Constitution sets the salary of a state legislator at $7,200 per year, and it can
be changed only by voter approval of a recommendation for an increase made by the Texas Ethics Commission. The Ethics Commission has made no such recommendation, but it has exercised its power to increase the per diem (daily) allowance for legislators, currently $204, while the legislature is in session. This meager salary is noticeably lower than in other major states; for instance, California legislators receive a salary of $119,702 per year and New York legislators earn $110,000.4
As a result, most Texas legislators hold jobs outside the legislature,
jobs that can create a potential conflict between legislators’ personal financial interests and their mandate to represent the public’s interest. In Texas, regular legislative sessions are scheduled by the constitution. They are held once
biennial regular sessions In Texas, regular legislative sessions are scheduled by the Constitution. They are held once every two years and are consequently referred to as biennial regular sessions.
special sessions Legislative sessions called by the Texas governor, who also sets their agenda.
every two years and are consequently referred to as biennial regular sessions. These biennial regular sessions last for 140 days between January and May or June of odd-numbered years. In contrast, other major states such as California, Illinois, Michigan, and New York do not limit the length of legislative sessions. As a result of the relatively short sessions, important legislation may be rushed through the
legislative process with insufficient analysis and debate. Other important legislation may never reach the floor or even be discussed in a legislative committee because of time limitations. In fact, legislative leaders often strategically delay action on bills they oppose, knowing that they will die when the legislature adjourns. Except to deal with extremely rare instances of impeachment, Texas’s legislature may not
call itself into special sessions or determine the issues to be considered during a special ses-sion. Only the governor can call special sessions and set their agendas. Special sessions can only consider legislative matters designated by the governor and are limited to 30 days. Governors may call as many special sessions as they wish and often call several of them when the legislature has failed to pass bills they have supported in previous sessions. Other constitutional features also limit
Did You Know? In 2023, Governor Abbott called several special sessions for such purposes as cutting property taxes, increasing penalties for human smuggling, and providing public funds for parents to send their children to private schools.
the legislature. The Texas Constitution establishes more specific procedural require-ments than most other state constitutions. Although the provision is often suspended, the constitution requires that a bill must be read on three separate days unless four-fifths of the chamber votes to set aside the require-ment. It stipulates when bills may be intro-duced and how they will be reported out of
committee, signed, and entered in the legislative journal once enacted. It even specifies how the enacting clause will read. Although most states legally require a balanced budget, Texas’s constitutional restriction
would appear to be more effective than most, as Texas’s per capita state debt remains among the lowest in the nation. Article 3, Section 49, strictly limits the legislature in authorizing state debt except under rare conditions, and the comptroller of public accounts is required to certify that funds are available for each appropriations measure adopted. Bonds can be authorized only by constitutional amendment—a provision that has bred numerous amendments. For example, specific constitutional amendments have authorized the sale of bonds for student loans, parks and water development, and prison constructio
the governor 10 days (excluding Sundays) to act during the session and 20 days after it adjourns. For legislation passed during the final days of the legislative session, the governor may avoid the threat of an override by simply waiting until the legislature adjourns before vetoing the bill. Texas is among 44 states that give the governor line-item veto power to strike out particular
sections of an appropriations bill without vetoing the entire bill. Several states also allow their governors to line-item veto matters other than appropriations, but Texas only permits line-item vetoes of appropriations legislation and no other matters. The governor of Texas lacks both the reduction veto (the power to reduce amounts in an appropriations bill without striking them out altogether) and the pocket veto (the power to kill legislation by simply ignoring it after the end of the legislative session).
Judicial Branch Just as the constitution divides power in the executive branch, Article 5 also fragments the
judicial branch. Texas is the only state other than Oklahoma that has two courts of final appeal. The highest court for civil matters is the nine-member Texas Supreme Court; the other, for criminal matters, is the nine-member Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Leaving some flexibility as to number and jurisdiction, the constitution also creates courts of appeals, as well as district, county, and justice of the peace courts. The same article describes the selec-tion of grand and trial juries and such county administrative officers as sheriff, county clerk, county attorney, and district attorney. The number and variety of courts are confusing to the average citizen, and coordination
and supervision are minimal. Lower-level courts have also come under attack because some of their judges are considered to be unqualified to serve. The constitution specifies only general qualifications for county judges and justices of the peace, who do not need to be lawyers. There were very likely good reasons for people without legal training to serve as judges during the latter part of the nineteenth century, but today many Texans regard them as an anachronism. Another factor that affects their qualifications is the way judges are selected. In Texas, judges
are chosen in partisan elections, general elections in which the candidates are nominated by political parties and their respective party labels appear on the ballot. Trial judges are elected to serve for four years and appeals court judges for six, but judges often leave office before the end of their last term. The governor has the power to fill most judicial vacancies until the next election—a power that gives the governor considerable influence over the makeup of the courts; once in office, the governor’s appointees have the advantages of incumbency and often are returned to office without facing a serious challenge in the next election.
Voting Rights A major function of state and local governments in the United States is to determine the character of democracy, as they administer elections and set requirements for suffrage (the legal right to vote). Article 6 of the Texas Constitution, which deals with suffrage requirements, denies the right to vote to persons under age 18, certain convicted felons, and individuals found mentally incompetent by a court of law. We discuss the evolution of Texans’ suffrage rights extensively in Chapter 4. Although constitutional restrictions on voter qualifications are now as minimal as any in
the nation, Texans still lack certain opportunities to participate directly in state government. Unlike many states, the Texas Constitution does not allow statewide initiative, a process that empowers citizens to place a proposal on the ballot for voter approval. Neither does the con-stitution permit statewide a referendum, an election that permits voters to determine whether a statute will go into effect. Likewise, the Texas Constitution does not allow for popular recall, special elections initi-ated by citizen petitions to remove state officials before the end of their term. Initiatives, ref-erendums, and popular recall are permitted in many other states and even in some Texas cities, but not at the state level in Texas.
Methods of Direct Democracy Figure 3.1 shows that more than half of the states allow citizens to play some direct role in making or repealing laws through initiative or referendum. In states with constitutions that permit initiatives,
voters may submit petitions proposing changes to statutes or the state constitution. Initiative proposals in most states are placed directly on the ballot if a required minimum number of registered voters have signed the petition. Other states have indirect initiative, in which a successful petition requires the legislature to consider a proposal, which is then placed on the ballot only if the legislature fails to pass it.
For example, citizens in several states from California to Missouri have successfully used the direct initiative process, and in Maine and Massachusetts the indirect initiative
process, to put measures on the ballot legalizing the sale and consumption of marijuana for recreational use. A second form of direct democracy is the popular
referendum, which allows voters effectively to repeal a new law passed by the state legislature. Voters may organize a petition to place the objectionable legislation on the ballot. If the petition contains the minimum number of valid signatures, the law’s implementation is delayed until a referendum can be held, and the law is voided if voters reject it

Texas permits voters to decide directly on only two statewide matters: ratifying consti-tutional amendments and setting legislative salaries. Texas political parties sometimes place propositions on their primary ballots, but the results are purely symbolic and are not legally binding.
Public Education
Did You Know? At the time of the Texas Supreme Court ruling in Edgewood v. Kirby, the Edgewood Independent School District had $38,854 in property wealth per student, while the Alamo Heights Independent School District had $570,109 per student.
Article 7 of the Texas Constitution states that a “general diffusion of knowledge being essential to the preservation of the liberties and rights of the people, it shall be the duty of the Legislature of the State to establish and make suitable provision for the support and maintenance of an efficient system of public free schools.” In the seminal case of Edgewood Independent School District v. Kirby in 1989, the Texas Supreme Court found that the existing method of financing the state’s public schools violated the Texas Constitution because of dramatic differences in per-stu-dent spending levels among the state’s school districts. Edgewood eventually led to school finance reforms that made funding more equitable across districts, but the case also spawned an ongoing legal debate over the funding of public education in Texas, with judges serving as the
arbiters in a continuing series of disputes over what constitutes a suitable and efficient education system. After decades of litigation, the Texas Supreme Court finally approved the Texas system of public school finance in 2016.5
Local Government
The Texas Constitution subordinates local governments to the state, and it decentral-izes government power by assigning many state responsibilities to local governments, especially counties. As a result, the constitution describes a rigid organizational structure for counties in Articles 9 and 16, and voters of the entire state were once required to approve amendments so individual counties could abolish obsolete county offices like hide inspector, superintendent of schools, and weigher. The constitution now authorizes county voters to abolish certain offices, but there is no provision for county home rule, which would allow voters to establish a county governing structure of their choice. As in state government, the constitution divides and diffuses county powers through a plural executive system. The legislature has the power to set up structures for city governments and offers munici-palities several standard alternative general-law charters. Cities with populations of more than 5,000 may adopt home-rule charters that establish any organizational structure or program that does not conflict with state law or the constitution. Generally, the legislature has the power to provide for the
Did You Know? Community college districts are special-district governments that are created when residents in one or more independent school districts vote to approve their creation in a local referendum. Today, 50 Texas community college districts, each governed by an elected board, use property taxes to pay for a substantial share of the cost of educating about half of Texas college students.
establishment of limited-purpose local governments known as special districts including hospital districts, school districts, water districts, municipal utility districts, and even mosquito control districts. The legislature has directly established some special districts, but many have been created under laws that allow cities and counties to establish them, often after voter approval. Now numbering over 2,000, special districts have multiplied taxing and spending authorities and, except for school districts, operate largely outside of the public’s view. In Chapter 11, we discuss how constitutional provisions for local governments are implemented in practice

Amending and Revising the Texas Constitution
LO 3.3 Explain the process of amending and revising the Texas Constitution and the reasons that amendments are frequently necessary.
Given the level of detail in the Texas Constitution, frequent amendments are necessary to reflect changing realities. The large number of constitutional amendments ratified since 1876 suggests that Texans understand the need to amend the constitution, even though they have steadfastly resisted any attempts to systematically revise it.
The Amendment Process
Article 17 of the Texas Constitution establishes the constitutional amendment process as a two-step process, shown in Figure 3.2. First, proposal of constitutional amendments must be supported by two-thirds of the total membership of each house of the Texas Legislature—at least 21 senators and 100 representatives. Second, ratification of constitutional amendments, which actually puts them into effect, requires approval by a majority of those persons voting on the amendment in either a regular or a special election. Because such an extraordinary majority of legislators must agree merely to propose constitutional amendments, a number of them are relatively uncontroversial; during the past 20 years voters have approved more than 90 percent of proposed amendments. Every legislative session over the last half century has proposed at least one constitutional
amendment, and most have proposed several. Recent constitutional amendments have some-times been minor, such as the one in 2021 to permit certain organizations to conduct raffles at rodeos; some have been of mostly symbolic importance, such as the right-to-hunt amendment in 2015. Still others have been of major substantive importance, such as the 2019 amendment to forbid a state personal income tax. Some of the constitution’s defenders maintain that giving Texas voters the opportunity to
express themselves on constitutional amendments reaffirms popular control of government. In reality, faced with trivial, confusing, or technical proposals, voters display little interest in amendment elections. With few exceptions, voters cast their ballots on these amendments in
Figure 3.2 The Two-Step Constitutional Amendment Process Amending the Texas Constitution requires proposal and ratification. Even though the process appears to be fairly difficult, the Texas constitution has been amended more

November of odd-numbered years, when few other issues are being decided and voter partici-pation is extremely low. During the twenty-first century, voter turnout in off-year constitu-tional amendment elections has averaged only 7 percent of the state’s voting age population, reaching a high of 14 percent only when Texas voters decided to ban same-sex marriage in 2005. In contrast, turnout in state general elections has averaged 38 percent of the voting-age population in even-numbered years, when federal, state, and county officials are on the ballot.
Criticisms of the Texas Constitution
Every state constitution is longer than the U.S. Constitution, but few are as restrictive as the Texas Constitution. Figure 3.3 shows that the Texas Constitution is one of the longest, most detailed, and most frequently amended state constitutions in the nation. With approximately
Figure 3.3 Length and Number of Amendments in the Fifty State Constitutions
State constitutions vary across a wide range of lengths and number of amendments. Texas’s constitution has the second most words and the second most amendments among the fifty states. To explain how historical forces resulted in the Texas Constitution needing more frequent amendments than most other state constitutions, see the video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_h7oHEWahgQ
100,000 words, it is the nation’s second longest after Alabama’s. And with 517 amendments, it is the second most amended state constitution because Texans have often responded to emerg-ing challenges by further amending their constitution. The constitution, reformers charge, is too long, poorly organized and confusing to most of the state’s citizens. Constitutional detail generates the need for amendments to make policies on subjects that
normally would be handled by legislative statute. Much of the length of Article 3 results from its in-depth description of state policies such as the Veterans’ Land Program, Texas park and water development funds, student loans, welfare programs, a grain warehouse self-insurance fund, and the program for the adoption of retired police dogs. The constitution establishes the design of the great seal of Texas, authorizes the legislature to pass fence laws, and even explains how the state must purchase stationery! Article 16 authorizes the legislature to regulate cattle brands; Article 11 permits the building of sea walls. Inclusion of such statute-like details in the Texas Constitution means that constitutional amendments are necessary to change even relatively unimportant decisions that could easily be handled by the legislature. Events may outstrip detailed constitutional provisions, leaving deadwood, inoperable con-stitutional provisions that have been either voided by a conflicting U.S. constitutional or statu-tory law or made irrelevant by changing circumstances and contexts. For example, the state constitutional provision forbidding same-sex marriage has become inoperative because of a ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court. To remove this or any other unnecessary detail, voters would have to approve a constitutional amendment or consider revising the entire document.
Attempts to Revise the Texas Constitution Attempts to substantially revise the constitution have met with successive failures. Ironically, in 1972, Texas voters had to amend the constitution to provide for its revision. Under the provisions of that amendment, the legislature established a constitutional revision commission of 37 members appointed by the governor, lieutenant governor, speaker of the house, attorney general, chief justice of the supreme court, and presiding judge of the court of criminal appeals. The commission made several proposals. Meeting in 1974, the legislature acted as a constitutional convention and agreed to many of these recommenda-tions. However, the convention divided over the issue of a right-to-work provision, and the final document could not muster the two-thirds vote needed to submit the proposal to the electorate. In the 1975 regular session, the legislature proposed
eight constitutional amendments to the voters. Together, the proposed amendments were substantially the same as the proposals the legislature had previously defeated. If they had been adopted, the amendments would have short-ened the constitution by 75 percent through reorganization and by eliminating statute-like detail and deadwood. In addition, the legislature would have been
strengthened by annual sessions, and a salary commission would have set the legislators’ salary. Although limited to two terms, the governor would have been designated as the chiefplanning officer and given removal powers and certain powers of fiscal control. The court system would have been unified and its administrative procedure simplified. Local governments would have operated under broader home-rule provisions, and counties would have been authorized to pass general ordinances and to abolish unneeded offices.

Opponents’ chief arguments were against more power for the legislature, greater govern-ment costs, and the possibility of an income tax—all of which were serious concerns for many Texans. Because the legislature had written the proposals, it was easy for the Texas voter to see such things as annual sessions and flexibility concerning their salaries as a “grab for power” that would substantially increase government expenditures. Despite an emotional campaign, only 15 percent of voting-age Texans cast ballots in the election, and they overwhelmingly rejected all of the proposed amendments. A more recent attempt to revise the state constitution did not get so far as the 1972–75
efforts. In 1999, Representative Bob Junell and Senator Bill Ratliff supported a revision that would have raised legislative pay, lengthened legislative terms, given the governor more appointive powers, and provided for a merit system for state judges. Their proposals died in legislative committee.
Applying What You Have Learned about the Texas Constitution LO 3.4 Apply what you have learned about the Texas Constitution.
You learned that the Texas Constitution provides for a separation of powers between three branches of government: legislative, executive, and judicial; it also restricts power within each of the three branches of government. Limited to 140-day regular sessions every other year, the legis-lature has made provision to deal with emergency disasters when it is not in session by delegating to the governor the power to issue emergency orders that have the effect of law. Does the Disaster Act of 1975 violate the separation of powers? Does this act give the governor too much power? With the state having experienced weather and pandemic-related disasters in 2020 and
2021, we asked a former Associate Justice of the Texas Supreme Court to weigh in on how the court must approach the restrictive language in the state constitution in a way that makes it possible for state institutions to respond to such emergencies in practice. Eva Guzman was appointed to the Texas Supreme Court by Governor Rick Perry in 2009.
In 2010, she was elected to a full six-year term, becoming the first Hispanic woman to win statewide office in Texas. Guzman was reelected in 2016 for another six-year term. In 2021, Guzman resigned from the Texas Supreme Court to run for the office of attorney general but was unsuccessful in her bid to defeat incumbent Ken Paxton in the 2022 Republican primary

Politics in Practice The Constitutionality of Emergency Powers
by Eva Guzman Former Texas Supreme Court Justice
Disasters, whether localized or widespread, can wreak havoc and catastrophe that test the limits of governance. In recent years, unprecedented natural disasters like Hurricane Harvey in 2017 and Winter Storm Uri in 2021 brought hardship, suffering, and substantial property losses to millions of Texans. But in terms of modern disasters, the COVID 19 pandemic has no equal. For more than a year, the pandemic has disrupted governments worldwide. To address this prolonged crisis, state governments across the United States have varied in their use of executive power.
In Texas, the governor declared a statewide disaster and invoked the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 to issue a number of executive orders and proclamations aimed at protecting the health and safety of our citizens. The Disaster Act empowers the governor to issue mandates carrying the force of la
nd authorizes the governor to suspend certain laws and rules if strict compliance would impede an adequate disaster response.6
To inform the governor and the people about the scope and
limits of any delegated law-making power, the Disaster Act includes provisions that define what a “disaster” means, place specific limitations on the governor’s powers, and enumerate the Act’s purposes as the prism through which an exercise of power may be assessed.7
Any infringement on the boundaries of a statute is redressable through legislative action or through the judicial system.
The policy choices that bear on governmental decision making in good times and bad can lead to disagreements and sharp discourse about the optimal course of action. Large scale disaster response is no different. Indeed, disharmony may be even more acute due to the exigencies and wide ranging interests at stake. As could be expected, the governor’s emergency orders in the midst of the COVID 19 pandemic gave rise to a host of contentious lawsuits challenging local application of those directives to myriad matters, including voting procedures in the 2020 election, release of inmates charged with or convicted of violent crimes, and business operations in the state. Lurking in the background of these legal disputes is a fundamental separation of powers question: Is the Disaster Act a permissible delegation of power from the legislative branch to the executive branch?
The Texas Constitution’s nondelegation doctrine generally prohibits one branch of government from transferring its powers to another branch:
The powers of the Government of the State of Texas shall be divided into three distinct departments, each of which shall be confided to a separate body of magistracy, to wit: Those which are Legislative to one; those which are Executive to another, and those which are Judicial to another; and no person, or collection ofpersons, being ofone ofthese departments, shall exercise any power properly attached to either ofthe others, except in the instances herein expressly permitted.8
The Constitution further states that “[n]o power of suspending laws in this State shall be exercised except by the Legislature.”9
Both provisions have been cited in disputes about the scope of executive authority under the Disaster Act.
The non-delegation doctrine is a crucial separation of powers component that prevents power from consolidating in a single branch. Even so, not every delegation of power is prohibited. The Supreme Court of Texas has opined that it would be difficult, if not impossible, for the Legislature to contend with every detail necessary to carry out contemporary laws and regulations.10
Indeed, “courts have
recognized that in a complex society like ours, delegation of legislative power is both necessary and proper in certain circumstances.”11
separation of powers mandate, the Legislature can delegate power to another branch only if it establishes reasonable standards to guide the exercise of such powers.12
delegation of power is constitutionally permissible is thus not a question of principle, but of degree.13
As the pandemic endures, the Disaster Act sits at the intersection of a tense legal and political debate over what role each branch of government has under the Texas Constitution in handling statewide disasters. Proponents and opponents of the state’s pandemic response measures have locked horns over the constitutionality of the Disaster Act. The debate raises intriguing questions about Texas’s constitutional system of governance and how the Disaster Act fits within our decentralized system.
Under the Texas Constitution, separation of powers exists not only between the branches of government but also within the branches themselves. By splitting the executive branch into several offices, creating two separate high courts, and generally requiring the Texas Legislature to meet only once every two years, the Texas Constitution minimizes the ability of any branch to arrogate or consolidate power. In doing so, our founding charter effectuates checks and

balances that limit governmental interference with the lives of Texas citizens, which promotes individual liberty and enables commerce to flourish. And because officials in all branches are elected, this system of governance results in enhanced accountability to the public. But a criticism of our system of governance is that, by curtailing each branch’s ability to consolidate power to the extent that it has, the Texas Constitution impedes the government’s ability to tackle emergencies, such as the ongoing pandemic.
The Legislature enacted the Disaster Act as one solution to this problem. By delegating broad authority to the governor to respond expeditiously and decisively to disasters, the Legislature sought to centralize the handling of such emergencies to one office in the executive branch. The judicial branch has not had occasion to weigh in on the constitutional debate surrounding enactment of the Disaster Act, but one thing has become clear: The issues that have arisen as the pandemic has unfolded have brought the complexities of Texas’s decentralized system of government into sharper relief. The constitutional debate surrounding the Disaster Act remains unsettled, but one thing is clear: the issues that have arisen throughout the pandemic’s evolution have brought the complexities of Texas’s decentralized system of government into sharper relief.

Chapter Summary
LO 3.1 Explain the origins of the Texas Constitution and the Constitutional Convention of 1875. The first Texas Constitution combined elements drawn from the U.S. Constitution and the constitutions of the states from which the Anglo settlers had migrated, but it also included unique elements based on the state’s experiences as a Spanish colony and Mexican state. The current constitution was written in the period following Reconstruction. Most Anglo Texans resented the Reconstruction Era’s state government and deemed it excessive and extravagant. In 1875, a state constitutional convention reacted to the Reconstruction regime by limiting state government in almost every imaginable way.
LO 3.2 Analyze the major constitutional structures, functions, and limits of Texas’s legislative, executive, and judicial branches. The Texas Constitution includes a bill of rights that is more expansive than those in most state constitutions. It follows the national pattern by establishing a separation of powers between legislative, executive, and judicial branches and establishes a system of checks and balances that allows each branch to check or limit the powers of the others. In addition to the limits that are common to the U.S.
Constitution and all state constitutions, the Texas constitution also strictly limits the legislature with short, infrequent sessions, low salaries, and statute-like details that the legislature canno

ange without amending the constitution. The governor is limited in his or her role as chief executive because Texas has a plural executive system that includes many independently elected executives over whom the governor has no control. Texas has divided power between two final courts of appeals, and judges are elected in partisan elections.
LO 3.3 Explain the process of amending and revising the Texas Constitution and the reasons that amendments are frequently necessary. Constitutional amendments are proposed by two-thirds of each chamber of the state legislature and must be ratified by a majority of voters before going into effect. The Texas Constitution has been amended more than most, but efforts to systematically revise the state constitution have failed. The constitution’s critics argue that a constitution should
establish essential governing principles and structures, but some state constitutions, like that of Texas, also go beyond those essentials to establish many details of routine government and, as a consequence, require frequent amendment to reflect new realities.
LO 3.4 Apply what you have learned about the Texas Constitution. You learned how the restrictions in the constitution can limit the practical operations of state government in emergencies and how former Texas Supreme Court Justice Eva Guzman views these constitutional issues
















