the proportion of women in the state’s most powerful execu-tive and legislative positions still falls quite short of women’s share of the Texas population (50 percent). For instance, of the state’s five most populous counties and cities, only one of each, Harris County (Judge Lina Hidalgo) and the City of Fort Worth (Mayor Mattie Parker), had a female chief executive as of June 1, 2023. And, in the state’s U.S. House del-egation and in the Texas Legislature, women account for only 21 percent and 30 percent of the members, respectively. African American Texans African Americans from other areas of the United States were brought to Texas as enslaved persons and served in that capacity until the end of the Civil War. They first learned of their freedom on June 19, 1865, a date commemorated annually at Juneteenth celebrations throughout the country, including Texas, where the day has been an official state holiday since 1980. During Reconstruction, African Americans both voted and held elective office (for example, 14 African Americans served in the Texas Legislature between 1870 and 1873), but the end of Reconstruction and Anglo opposition effectively ended African Americans’ political participation in the state. Civil rights were an increasingly elusive concept for ethnic and racial minorities following Reconstruction. African Americans were legally denied the right to vote in the Democratic white primary, the practice of excluding African Americans from primary elections in the Texas Democratic Party. Schools and public facilities such as theaters, restaurants, beaches, and hospitals were legally segregated by race. Segregation laws were enforced by official law enforcement agents as well as by Anglo cultural norms and unofficial organizations using terror tactics. Although segregation laws were not usually formally directed at Latinos, who were legally white, such laws were effectively enforced against them as well. The white suprem-acist organization known as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), members of local law enforcement, and the Texas Rangers actively participated in violence and intimidation of both Latinos and African Americans to keep them “in their segregated place.” Lynching was also used against both groups, often after torture.12 The KKK was first organized in the late 1860s to intimidate freed African American slaves. A modified, enlarged version was reborn in the 1920s with a somewhat altered mis-sion. The new Klan saw itself as a patriotic, Christian, fraternal organization for native-born white Protestants. Its members perceived a general moral decline in society, precipitated by “modern” young people, and a basic threat to the Protestant white Christian “race.” Klansmen sensed a threat to their values from African Americans, Jews, Catholics, Latinos, German Americans, and other “foreigners.” The Klan used intimidation, violence, and torture that included hanging, tarring and feathering, branding, beating, and castration as means of coercion. As many as 80,000 Texans (which amounted to almost 10 percent of the adult Anglo male population at the time) may have joined the “invisible empire” in an effort to make the world more to their liking. Many elected officials—federal and state legislators as well as county and city officials—were either avowed Klansmen or friendly neutrals. In fact, the Klan influenced Texas society to such an extent that its power was a major political issue from 1921 through 1925.13 In response to this racially charged atmosphere, a number of organizations committed to civil rights were founded or grew larger during the 1920s. These included the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), established in 1909, and the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), which was formed in Corpus Christi in 1929. When Dr. L. H. Nixon, an African American from El Paso, was denied the right to vote in the Democratic primary, the NAACP instituted legal action, and the U.S. Supreme Court found in Nixon v. Herndon (1927) that the Texas White Primary Law was unconstitutional. However, the Texas Legislature transferred control of the primary from the state to the execu-tive committee of the Texas Democratic Party, and the discrimination continued. Dr. Nixon again sought justice in the courts, and in 1931, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the new scheme was also unconstitutional. Texas Democrats then completely excluded African Americans from party membership. In Grovey v. Townsend (1935), the U.S. Supreme Court upheld