parks, schools, and streets named after individuals who served in the Confederacy. And, the level of support for the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement increased in the state among all ethnic and racial groups, with two-fifths of Texans having a favorable view of BLM in June 2020 com-pared to 28 percent in October 2016, with the pro-portion of Anglos having a favorable view of BLM almost doubling from 18 percent to 35 percent.18 Although the BLM movement ultimately failed to achieve its goals in Texas and the George Floyd Act did not pass in the Legislature, African Ameri-cans are now better represented in the corridors of power. For example, the mayors of the state’s two most populous cities, Sylvester Turner of Houston and Eric Johnson of Dallas, are both African Ameri-can. In both the U.S. House (13 percent) and the Texas Legislature (10 percent), African Americans hold a proportion of seats that is roughly comparable to the African American share of the Texas popula-tion (13 percent) Latino Texans Like most African Americans, Latinos were relegated to the lowest-paid jobs as either service workers or farmworkers. The Raymondville Peonage Cases in 1929 tested for the first time the legality of forcing vagrants or debtors to work off debts and fines as labor on private farms. The practice violated federal statutes, but was common-place in some Texas counties. The Willacy County sheriff stated in his defense that Latinos often sought arrest to gain shelter and that “peonage was not an unknown way of life for them.” The trials resulted in the arrest and conviction of several public officials and private individuals. The outcome of the trials was unpopular in the agricultural areas and contrary to the generally accepted belief that farmers should have a means of collecting debts from individual laborers.19 World War II Latino veterans, newly returned to the state from fighting to make the world safe for democracy, found discrimination still existed in their homeland. A decorated veteran, Major Hector Garcia, settled in Corpus Christi and became convinced by condi-tions in South Texas that still another war was yet to be fought on behalf of the region’s Latino community. Garcia, a medical doctor, found farm laborers enduring inhuman living conditions; disabled veterans starving, sick, and ignored by the Veterans Administration; and an entrenched, unapologetic Anglo culture that continued to impose public school segregation. To begin his war, Dr. Garcia needed recruits for his “army.” With other World War II veterans, Dr. Garcia organized the American G.I. Forum in a Corpus Christi elementary school classroom in March 1948. This organization spread throughout the United States and played a major role in providing Latinos with equal rights and civil respect. One of the incendiary sparks that ignited Latinos in Texas to fight for civil rights was Did You Know? In 2018, Veronica Escobar of El Paso and Sylvia Garcia of Houston became the first Texas Latinas ever to be elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. Private Felix Longoria’s funeral. Longoria was a decorated soldier who died in combat in the Philippines during World War II. His body was returned in 1949 to the South Texas town of Three Rivers (midway between San Antonio and Corpus Christi) for burial in the “Mexican section” of the cemetery, which was separated from the “white section” by barbed wire. But an obstacle developed: the funeral home’s director refused the Longoria family’s request to use its chapel because “the whites won’t like it.” Longo-ria’s widow asked Dr. Garcia for support, but the funeral director also refused his request. Dr. Garcia then sent a flurry of telegrams and letters to Texas’s congressional delegation protesting the actions of the director. Then-Senator Lyndon B. Johnson immediately responded and arranged for Longoria to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery.20 The fight to organize labor unions was the primary focus for much of the Latino civil activism in the 1960s and 1970s. In rural areas, large landowners controlled the political and economic systems and were united in their opposition to labor unions. The United Farm Workers (UFW) led a strike against melon growers and packers in Starr County in the 1960s, demanding a minimum wage and the resolution of other grievances.