political struggles over equal rights and their impact on the state’s political future. The politics of the state’s cultural regions have begun to lose their distinctive identities as Texas has become more metropolitan and economically and ethnically diverse. With this changing environment, a number of groups and individuals have endeavored to achieve greater cultural, political, social, and economic equality in the state. Texans’ Struggle for Equal Rights Anglo male Texans initially resided atop the pyramid of status, wealth, and power in orga-nized Texas society. They wrote the rules of the game and used those rules to protect their position against attempts by women, African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans and members of the LGBTQ community to share in the fruits of full citizenship. Only after the disenfranchised groups organized and exerted political pressure against their governments did the doors of freedom and equality open enough for them to come inside. Women Texans Women in the Republic of Texas could neither serve on juries nor vote, but unmarried women retained many of the rights that they had enjoyed under Span-ish law, which included control over their property. Married women retained some Spanish law benefits because, unlike under Anglo-Saxon law, Texas marriage law did not join the married couple into one legal person with the husband as the head. Texas married women could own inherited property, share owner-ship in community property, and make a legal will. However, the husband had control of all the property, both separate and com-munity (including earned income), and an employer could not hire a married woman without her husband’s consent.6 Divorce laws were restrictive on both parties, but a husband could win a divorce in the event of a wife’s “amorous or lascivi-ous conduct with other men, even short of adultery,” or if she had committed adultery only once. He could not gain a divorce for concealed premarital fornication. On the other hand, a wife could gain a divorce only if “the husband had lived in adultery with another woman.” Physical violence was not grounds for divorce unless the wife could prove a “serious danger” that might happen again. In practice, physical abuse was tolerated if the wife behaved “indiscreetly” or “provoked” her husband. Minority and poor Anglo wives had little legal protection from beatings because the woman’s “station in life” and “standing in society” were also legal considerations.7 Governor James “Pa” Ferguson (1915–17) became an unwitting catalyst for the women’s suffrage movement during the World War I period. Led by Minnie Fisher Cunningham, Texas suffragists orga-nized, spoke out, marched, and lobbied for the right to vote during the Ferguson Administration, but they were initially unable to gain political traction because of Ferguson’s opposition. When he became embroiled in political controversy over funding for the University of Texas, women joined in the groundswell of opposition. Suffragists effectively lobbied state legislators and organized rallies advocating Ferguson’s impeachment.8 National suffrage momentum precipitated a pro-posed constitutional amendment establishing the right of women to vote throughout the United States. Having endured more than five years of “heavy artillery” from Cunningham and the Texas Equal Suffrage Association, legislative opposition crumbled, and in June of 1919 Texas became one of the first southern states to ratify the Nine-teenth Amendment. Texas women received full voting rights in 1920.10 Women were given the right to serve on juries in 1954. Texas’s ratification of the proposed Did You Know? In 1924 Miriam “Ma” Ferguson (spouse of James “Pa” Ferguson) became only the second woman in the United States to be elected governor. She remained the sole woman to be elected governor of Texas until Ann Richards in 1990. national Equal Rights Amendment in 1972, the addition of a similar amendment to its own state constitution, and the passage of a series of laws titled the Marital Property Act amounted to major steps toward women’s equality and heralded the beginning of a more enlightened era in Texas. The Act granted married women equal rights in insurance, banking, real estate, contracts, divorce, child custody, and property rights. This was the first such comprehensive family law in the United States.1 Over the past thirty years, women have notably increased their presence in the corridors of power in Texas. That said,