divided into a series of political cultural regions with differing characteristics and traditions: (1) East Texas, (2) the Gulf Coast, (3) South Texas, (4) Far West Texas, (5) the Hill Country, (6) West Texas, (7) the Panhandle, (8) North Texas, and (9) Central Texas. Each region is characterized by distinctive historical, ethnic, and economic influences. LO 1.3 Analyze Texans’ political struggles over equal rights and their impact on the state’s political future. Texas social conservatism inherited from the Old South traditionalistic culture has resulted in resistance to demands for gender, racial, social, and political equality. In several instances, groups have succeeded in their struggles for equality by appealing to the federal courts outside of the political control of Texas political institutions. Women were not legally equal to men in early Texas, and their path to equality has been a winding and occasionally delayed one. Activists finally won the long battle for the right to vote in 1918. It was not until 1972, however, that women won equal rights in real estate, contracts, divorce, child custody, and property rights. African American Texans’ struggle for legal equality reflected similar struggles being simultaneously waged in other southern states. The battle to vote in the Democratic primary and the right of access and admission to public accommodations and public schools were settled only by national courts or congressional intervention. The Latino struggle in Texas was similar to that of African Americans and was resolved only by national action. Several Latino rights organizations were founded in Texas, and the judicial decision in Hernandez v. Texas (1954) that established the constitutional concept of a “class apart” became important throughout the United States. Until the last quarter of the twentieth century, Asian Americans accounted for less than 1 percent of the Texas population. Fueled in large part by immigration from countries such as India, Vietnam, and China, today 6 percent of Texans are of Asian American descent. LGBTQ Texans are now waging similar battles for legal equality. Lawrence v. Texas (2003) gained national significance by decriminalizing sexual activity between consenting persons of the same biological sex. Later Supreme Court decisions legalized same-sex marriages and prohibited discrimination against LGBTQ persons. A high-profile series of battles for LGBTQ equality is presently taking place throughout the state over the rights of transgender persons. In 2022, the Latino population surpassed the Anglo population, making Texas a Latino plurality state. Increased political clout can come with increased population, and Latinos could begin to challenge the political and economic dominance of Anglos. Regardless of the political outcome of population shifts, Texas is becoming more diverse and now has an opportunity to build on its already rich cultural pluralism. LO 1.4 Apply what you have learned about Texas political culture and diversity. You learned about the controversy about Confederate monuments and how they were erected to resurrect the honor of the Confederates by promoting a dubious “Lost Cause” narrative. You learned why the descendants of enslaved persons find these symbols of oppression and the cultural myths surrounding them to be offensive