this ploy, and the Texas Democratic primary remained an all-white organization. Although it had suffered a temporary setback in the episode, the NAACP had proven its potential as a viable instrument for African American Texans to achieve justice.14 In 1946, Heman Sweatt applied for admission to the University of Texas Law School, which by Texas law was segregated (see Chapter 2). State laws requiring segrega-tion were constitutional as long as facilities serving Afri-can Americans and whites were equal. Because Texas had no law school for African Americans, the legislature hurriedly established a law school for Sweatt and, for his “convenience,” located it in his hometown of Houston. Although officially established, the new law school lacked both faculty and a library and, as a result, the NAACP again sued the state. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that education at Sweatt’s new law school, in fact, was not equal to that of the University of Texas Law School and ordered him admitted to that institution. It is worth noting that “separate but equal” facilities remained legal after this case because the Court did not overturn Plessy v. Ferguson, which granted the constitutional sanction for legal segregation. Instead, the Court simply ruled that the new law school was not equal to that at the University of Texas.15 The U.S. Supreme Court did not finally outlaw ★ SRQ The Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution says that no state shall deny any person the equal protection of the law. Why did the U.S. Supreme Court hold that state laws requiring racial segregation violated this provision? segregation until the Brown v. Board ofEducation decision in 1954. The political and social fallout from the U.S. Supreme Court’s Brown v. Board of Education (1954) public school desegregation decision did not bypass Texas. When the Mansfield Independent School District, just to the south-east of Fort Worth, was ordered to integrate in 1956, angry Anglos surrounded the school and prevented the enrollmen of three African American children. Governor Allan Shivers declared the demonstration an “orderly protest” and sent the Texas Rangers to support the protestors. Because the administra-tion of President Dwight D. Eisenhower took no action, the school remained segregated. The Mansfield school desegregation incident “was the first example of failure to enforce a federal court order for the desegregation of a public school.”16 federal funding, did the Mansfield ISD finally desegregate. Federal District Judge William Wayne Justice in United States v. Texas (1970) ordered the complete desegregation of all Texas public schools. The decision was one of the most extensive desegregation orders in history and included the process for executing the order in detail. The U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals largely affirmed Justice’s decision, but it refused to extend its provisions to Latino children.17 The 1960s are known for the victories of the national civil rights movement. Texan James Farmer was cofounder of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and, along with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Whitney Young, and Roy Wilkins, was one of the “Big Four” African-American leaders who shaped the civil rights struggle in the 1950s and 1960s. Farmer, who followed the nonviolent principles of Mahatma Gandhi, initiated sit-ins as a means of integrating public facilities and freedom rides as a means of registering African Americans to vote. The first sit-in to protest segregated facilities in Texas was organized with CORE support by students from Wiley and Bishop Colleges. The students occupied the rotunda of the Harrison County Courthouse in the East Texas City of Marshall. The struggle for equality continues by, and on behalf of, African Americans in Texas. In the aftermath of the death of former Houston resident George Floyd, an African American who was murdered by an Anglo Minneapolis police officer in May 2020 (see Image 1.3), calls for racial justice became louder in Texas as well as across the country and worldwide. In Texas, members of the Texas Legislative Black Caucus drafted the George Floyd Act, which would have implemented widespread police reform including a ban on chokeholds and the abolishment of arrests for fine-only offenses like petty theft. Efforts intensified across the state to remove statues of Confederate soldiers from Texas parks and college campuses and to rename Texas