percent), Collin County north of Dallas (18 percent), and Denton County north of Fort Worth (11 percent). Asian American representation in the corridors of power has never been higher in Texas than it is today. There are six Asian American state representatives (two Repub-licans and four Democrats), up from a previous record of four during the 2021-23 leg-islative session, and in 2023 includes the first two Muslims to ever serve in the Texas Legislature (Pakistani Americans Salman Bhojani of Tarrant County and Suleman Lalani of Fort Bend County). There are no Asian American Texas state senators or members of Congress, with Asian Americans overall holding 3 percent of the seats in the Texas Legislature. In addition, Indian American KP George is serving his second term as Fort Bend County Judge (see George’s essay on his role as county judge in Chapter 11) and Japanese American Peter Sakai is serving his first term as Bexar County Judge, meaning that two of Texas’s ten most populous counties have an Asian American chief executive, as does its second most populous city, San Antonio (Mayor Ron Nirenberg). Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Texans Discrimina-tion against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer Texans has long been commonplace in Texas. Furthermore, state law has criminalized certain intimate sexual conduct by two persons of the same sex. In 1998, a Harris County sheriff’s deputy discovered two men having intimate sexual contact in a private resi-dence, and the men were arrested and convicted for vio-lating a Texas anti-sodomy statute. Their conviction was appealed and eventually reached the U.S. Supreme Court in the case Lawrence v. Texas. In Justice Anthony Ken-nedy’s majority opinion, he stated that the Texas law vio-lated the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which does not protect sodomy, but does protect personal relationships and the ability to have those relationships without fear of punishment or criminal classification. The Texas statute intended to control the most intimate of all human activity, sexual behavior, in the most private of places, the home. The Lawrence decision simultaneously invalidated sodomy, laws in thirteen other states, thereby protecting same-sex behavior in every state and territory in the United States. The right to marry was until recently the frontline of the LGBTQ battle for equal Did You Know? In 2019, the Texas Legislature’s first LGBTQ Caucus was formed by five women representatives: Celia Israel, Jessica González, Mary González, Julie Johnson, and Erin Zwiener. 21 rights, with this battle complicated by the 1996 federal Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA). DOMA defined marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman and further stipu-lated that the federal government would not recognize same-sex marriages for purposes of benefits such as Social Security, veterans’ benefits, and income tax filings.25 the U.S. Supreme Court decided the case United States v. Windsor, in which it held that Legislature passed a bill that prohibits transgender girls from participating in public school athletic competi-tion in sports that are designated for biological females, a policy that was extended to sports at Texas public colleges and universities during the 2023 legislative session. In 2023, the Texas Legislature also passed a bill that prohibits medical professionals from providing puberty blockers, hormone therapy, and surgical inter-vention to children under the age of 18 for the purpose of altering the child’s biological characteristics to align with their gender identity. Population Diversity Today Demographics are population characteristics, such as age, gender, ethnicity or race, employment, and income, that social scientists use to describe groups in society; in Texas, these characteristics are rapidly changing. Texas is one of the fastest-growing states in the nation and is becoming more culturally diverse as immigrants from other nations and migrants from other states continue to find it a desirable place to call home. U.S. Census data and population estimates by the Texas State Demographer underscore how the state has become much more ethnically and racially diverse over the past 40 years. Figure 1.6 shows the breakdown of Texans for 1980 as 66 percent Anglo, 21 percent Latino, 12 percent African American, and less than 1 percent other. During the course of the next four decades, the share of the Texas population accounted for by Anglos