brought about by the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a treaty that has helped remove trade barriers among Canada, Mexico, and the United States. NAFTA has served as an economic stimulus for the Texas Border because it is a conduit for much of the commerce with Mexico. More than three-quarters of U.S.–Mexico land trade crosses the border in Texas. In 2018, NAFTA was modified with the new agreement rebranded as the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA). The Texas Border South and Far West Texas comprise the area known as the “Texas Border.” A corresponding “Mexico Border” includes the Mexican states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas. It can be argued that the Texas Border and the Mexico Border are two parts of an economic, social, and cultural region with a substantial degree of similarity that sets it apart from the rest of the United States and of Mexico. The Border region, which is expanding in size both to the north and to the south, has a binational, bicultural, and bilingual subculture in which internationality is commonplace and economies and societies on both sides constantly interact.5 The Texas Border cities are closely tied to the Mexican economy on which their prosperity maquiladoras Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ inexpensive Mexican labor for assembly and piecework. depends. Although improving economically, these regions remain among the poorest in the United States. The economy of the Texas Border benefits economically from maquiladoras, which are Mexican factories where U.S. corporations employ lower-cost Mexican labor for assembly and piecework. The Texas Border also serves as a major transshipment point for drug cartels as they bring illegal drugs from Mexico to sell in the thriving U.S. market for illicit narcotics. In addition, a significant share of undocumented immigration into the United States occurs in the Texas Border region, making it the focus of a great deal of political attention. Hill Country The Hill Country north and west of San Antonio was settled primarily by immigrants from Germany, but also by Czech, Polish, and Norwegian immigrants. Although the immigrants intermarried with Anglo Americans, Central European culture and archi-tecture were dominant well into the twentieth century. Skilled artisans were common in the towns; farms were usually moderate in size, self-sufficient, and family owned and operated. North Texas experienced extraordinary population growth after World War II, with exten-sive migration from the rural areas of East, West, and Central Texas. The descendants of these migrants, after several generations, tend to have urban attitudes and behavior. Recent migra-tion from other states, especially from the North, has been significant. Many international corporations have established headquarters in North Texas, and their employees contribute to the region’s diversity and cosmopolitan environment. Although North Texas is more economically diverse than most other Texas regions, it does rely heavily on banking, insurance, and the defense and aerospace industries. Electronic equip-ment, computer products, plastics, and food products are also produced in the region. North Texas’s economic diversity has allowed it to avoid or at least attenuate some of the boom–bust cycles experienced by other regions in the state where the economy is more dependent on a single industry or a smaller number of industries. Central Texas Central Texas is often called the “Texas Triangle” because roughly trian-gular in shape, with its three corners being Houston, Dallas–Fort Worth, and San Antonio. The centerpiece of the region is Austin (Travis County), one of the fastest-growing metro-politan areas in the nation. Already a center of government and higher education, Austin has become the “Silicon Valley” of high-tech industries in Texas as well as an internationally recognized cultural center, whose annual South by Southwest Music, Film and Interactive Festival (SXSW) is now a global event. Austin’s rapid growth is a result of significant migration from the East and West Coasts, as well as from various regions in Texas. The influx of highly educated people from outside Texas has added to the already substantial pool of accomplished Austinites. The cultural and economic traits of all the other Texas regions mingle here, with no single trait being dominant. Austin, though, stands out as an island of liberalism in a predominantly conservative state (see Figure 1.2). Politics and Cultural Diversity LO 1.3 Analyze Texans’