Starr County police offi-cers, the local judiciary, and the Texas Rangers were all accused of brutality as they arrested and prosecuted strikers for minor offenses. On February 26, 1977, members of the Texas Farm Workers Union (TFWU), strik-ers, and other supporters began a march to Austin to demand a $1.25 minimum wage and other improvements in working conditions for farmworkers. Press coverage intensified as the marchers slowly made their way north from the U.S.–Mexico border. Politicians, members of the American Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL–CIO), and the Texas Council of Churches accompanied the protestors. Governor John Connally, who had refused to meet them in Austin, traveled to New Braunfels with House Speaker Ben Barnes and Attorney General Waggoner Carr to intercept the march and inform strikers that their efforts would have no effect. Ignoring the governor, the marchers continued to Austin and held a 6,500-person protest rally at the state capitol. The rally was broken up by the Texas Rangers and other law enforcement officers. The TFWU took legal action against the Rangers for their part in the repression of the rally. The eventual ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court held that the laws the Rangers had been enforcing were in violation of the U.S. Constitution. The Texas Rangers were subsequently reorganized and became a part of the Texas Department of Public Safety.21 One of the first successful legal challenges to segregated schools in Texas was Delgado v. Bastrop ISD (1948). The suit by Gustavo C. (Gus) Garcia charged that Minerva Delgado and other Latino children were denied the same school facilities and educational instruction available to Anglos. The battle continued until segregated facilities were eventually prohibited in 1957 by the decision in Hernandez v. Driscoll Consolidated ISD.22 Important to Latinos and, ultimately, all others facing discrimination was Hernandez v. State ofTexas (1954). An all-Anglo jury in the small town of Edna had convicted Pete Hernandez of murder in 1950. Attorneys Gus Garcia, Carlos Cadena, John Herrera, and James DeAnda challenged the conviction, arguing that the systematic exclusion of Latinos from jury duty in Texas violated Hernandez’s right to equal protection under the law guar-anteed by the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Texas courts had historically ruled that Latinos were white, so excluding them from all-Anglo (white) juries could not be legal discrimination. To change the system, the Latino team of lawyers would have to change the interpretation of the U.S. Constitution. The stakes were high. If they failed, Latino discrimination throughout the southwestern United States might legally continue for years. Garcia argued before the U.S. Supreme Court that Latinos, although white, were “a class apart” and suffered discrimination on the basis of their “class.” The U.S. Supreme Court agreed, overturned the Texas courts, and ruled that Latinos were protected by the Constitution from discrimination by other whites. The Hernandez decision established the precedent of constitutional protection by class throughout the United States and was an early forerunner of future decisions (see Table 1.1) prohibiting discrimination by gender, dis-ability, and sexual orientation.23 Texas Latinos today do not experience the same degree of discrimination 19 Image 1.4 Gus Garcia, legal advisor for the American G.I. Forum, is shown during a visit to the White House. Garcia was the lead attorney in the U.S. Supreme Court decision Hernandez v. Texas, 347 U.S. 475 (1954).Review the Latino rights movement at https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=dz fdINufpSE. as African Americans, but they do suffer significantly more discrimination than Anglos. Much of the discrimination felt by Latinos in Texas results from rhetoric and policies that primarily target recent immigrants from Latin America but are nonetheless seen by a majority of Latinos as being anti-Latino in focus, tenor, and impact. Examples include election reforms that have disproportionately affected the Latino commu-nity, continuing efforts to deport Latino undocumented immigrants, and the inhumane treat-ment suffered by Latino immigrants in detention facilities along the Texas–Mexico border. Latino representation in the corridors of power in Texas has increased over the past two decades. For instance, the state’s most populous county, Harris County, has since 2019 been run by a Latina, County Judge Lina Hidalgo. Likewise, the state’s sixth most populous city El Paso, is run by a Latino, Mayor Oscar