Leeser. Despite these gains, Latino representa-tion still lags well below the community’s share of the Texas population (40 percent). For example, Latinos hold proportions of Texas U.S. House seats (18 percent) and of Texas Legislature seats (24 percent) that are far below the 40 percent of the state’s population accounted for by Latinos. Asian American Texans The Asian American population in Texas was, up until the last 40 years, very small. Even as late as 1980, Asian Americans accounted for less than 1 percent of the Texas population. Today however, 6 percent of Texans identify as Asian American and Asian Americans are projected to account for one in ten Texans by 2050, with this rapid population growth fueled to a considerable extent by immigration. The first Asian immigrants in Texas were from China Did You Know? In 1964 Thomas J. Lee became the first Asian American state legislator in Texas history. Lee was born in China and immigrated to the United States when he was eight. He served one term (1965–67) in the Texas House representing Bexar County (San Antonio). and worked on railroads across the state in the late 1800s. They were followed by a small group of Chinese immigrants who had assisted General John Pershing in his unsuccessful raids to capture Pancho Villa in Mexico in 1917 and were brought by Pershing to San Antonio due to his fear that they would be harmed were they to stay in Mexico. Due to the nationwide Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 however, the Chinese population in Texas remained minute until the Act was repealed in 1943, but even as late as 1980, still num-bered only 25,000. The end of the Vietnam War in 1975 with the fall of Saigon and the collapse of the Republic of South Vietnam (see Image 1.5) resulted in a substantial influx of Vietnamese refugees escaping the North Vietnamese Communist regime into Texas during the second half of the 1970s. The 1980 Census revealed that Texas had more Vietnamese residents than every state other than California, with an especially large concentration of Vietnamese immigrants in the Houston region. The most recent noteworthy wave of Asian Image 1.5 This Vietnam War Memorial is located in Houston’s Little Saigon neighborhood. It depicts a South Vietnamese soldier and an American solider fighting side by side, and is flanked by the flags of the United States, the Republic of South Vietnam, and Texas. migration to Texas has come from India and Pakistan. Immigration from these two coun-tries in South Asia has increased in the past two decades and many of these migrants have settled in the Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston regions. A majority of Indian Americans practice the Hindu religion, but significant numbers are Mus-lims, as are most Pakistani immigrants. Together, Islamic Texans of Indian and Pakistani descent constitute one of the largest Muslim communities in the United States. In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, discrimination, violence, and vandalism were directed against the state’s Indian Americans of all faiths, as well as Pakistani Ameri-cans and other peoples of the Islamic religion. In the past two decades, these incidents of prejudice have dissipated somewhat, but they have not dis-appeared. In fact, an August 2022 Texas Politics Project survey found that more than two-thirds of Texans believe that Muslims suffer either a lot or some discrimination. Hate crimes directed at individual Muslims frequently occur in Texas, and in recent years mosques in the Austin, Dallas–Fort Worth and Houston metro regions have been vandalized. Today, the Texas Asian American population is highly diverse in regard to the country from which these Texans or their parents, grandparents or great grandparents immigrated. The national origin of 32 percent of Texas Asian Americans is Indian, 19 percent Vietnam-ese, 15 percent Chinese, 8 percent Filipino, 6 percent Pakistani, 5 percent Korean, 3 percent Nepalese and 2 percent Japanese, with the remaining 10 percent of Texas Asian Americans spread across more than a dozen different national origin groups.24 While statewide Asian Americans account for 6 percent of the Texas population, three counties have a proportion of Asian American residents that is considerably higher than the state average: Fort Bend County southwest of Houston (22