progressively declined and the share accounted for by Latinos and Asian Americans progressively rose, with the proportion of African Americans remaining roughly the same. In 2022, Latinos and Anglos each accounted for 40 percent of Texans, with the proportion of Latinos steadily increasing and the proportion of Anglos steadily decreasing. Lastly, between 1990 and 2020 the Asian American share of the Texas population tripled from 2 to 6 percent. Voter participation in Texas is comparatively quite low (see Chapter 4). Furthermore, ★ CTQ Why do younger and older Texans have notably different opinions about same-sex marriage? Latino political participation is low even by Texas standards. Given the growing share of eligible voters accounted for by Latinos, if Latinos begin to participate at the same rates as African Americans and Anglos, it could have a dramatic impact on the tenor and substance of politics and public policy in the Lone Star State. Equally important, changes in the ethnic and racial makeup of the state’s population will present decision makers with enormous challenges. Figure 1.7 shows that income inequality parallels ethnic and racial divisions in Texas. Poverty rates are higher and overall incomes are lower among African Americans and Latinos compared to Anglos and Asian Americans. Lower incomes are associated with more limited educational opportunity, inadequate access to health care, and much less robust participation in the state’s civic life. Poverty drives up the cost of state social services and can contribute to crime and familial dysfunction. How Texas adapts to the state’s changing demographics is likely to be the focus of political controversy for years to come Applying What You Have Learned about Texas Political Culture LO 1.4 Apply what you have learned about Texas political culture and diversity. In this chapter, you briefly learned about the struggle of African Americans for equality. Much of the early struggle focused on the constitutional rights to equal treatment under the law and the right to vote. That struggle still continues as Black Texans are treated unequally by some police officers and governments maintain Confederate symbols of oppression in the public square. Other Texans believe the campaign against these symbols is an effort to erase history. So, we asked Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson to explain the cultural background of these symbols so Texans can better understand the motivations of those protesting them. Eric Johnson was first elected Mayor of Dallas in 2019 and was reelected for a second term in 2023. Underscoring Johnson’s popularity, he was unopposed in his reelection bid, the first time in more than 50 years that a Dallas mayor has not faced any challengers. He is a former member of the Texas House of Representatives, where he represented Dallas from 2010 to 2019. During his tenure in the Texas House, Mayor Johnson served on 20 prominent legisla-tive committees and as the Chairman of the Dallas Area Legislative Delegation. After you have read the mayor’s article, you will be asked to explain the “Lost Cause” narrative, why it is inaccurate, and why descendants of enslaved persons would find Confed-erate symbols offensive. O 1.1 Analyze the relationships among Texas political culture, its politics, and its public policies. A political culture reflects people’s political values and beliefs. It explains how people feel about their government—their expectations of what powers it should have over their lives and what services it should provide. The generally conservative ideological position of Texans masks some notable subgroup differences based on gender, ethnicity and race, generational cohort, and geography. For example, men are on average more conservative than women and Anglos are more conservative than both Latinos and especially African Americans. At the same time, members of Generation Z are notably more liberal than Texans in other generational cohorts, especially Baby Boomers and those belonging to the Silent Generation, and residents of Travis County are significantly more liberal than residents of the state’s other populous counties. Texans’ predominantly conservative political culture is reflected in the state’s conservative public policies. Republicans control state political institutions and have enacted low tax and spending policies and conservative policies on social issues such as abortion and sexual orientation. LO 1.2 Differentiate the attributes that describe the major regions of Texas. Texas can be