

Learning Objectives LO 6.1 Define interest groups and identify their major types. LO 6.2 Describe how interest groups influence public policies in Texas. LO 6.3 Analyze the political balance of power among interest groups in Texas. LO 6.4 Evaluate the role of interest groups in Texas politics and policy formulation. LO 6.5 Apply what you have learned about interest groups.

itizens may act alone to influence government, and millions do. Nevertheless, when citi- together that strives to influence policy, they act as an interest group, sometimes known as a pressure group. Interest groups often play a high-stakes political game that determines who gets what from state government and who pays for it. As former Congresswoman Barbara Jordan famously said, "The stakes are too high for government to be a spectator sport."
Interest groups compete with each other as they strive to benefit from the state's $321 billion biennial budget. Such groups often depend on government outlays, and they solicit policy mak- ers for a piece of government spending. Construction companies ask the governor to support increased spending on infrastructure projects. Public school teachers pressure the legislature for more resources for public education. Advocates for low-income Texans ask lawmakers to increase Medicaid spending and expand Medicaid coverage. Many interest groups press the government to spend more, but usually advocate for less taxation-especially on their own members.
Business and professional groups plead for state regulations friendly to their interests. Because Texas's $2.4 trillion state economy represents a significant share of the national mar- ket, out-of-state producers wanting to sell in Texas modify their goods and services to comply with Texas regulations. As a result, Texas regulations can ripple out to other states, and they can determine what entire industries produce and how they produce it.'
For some interest groups, their fundamental values or their very way of life is at stake in public policy making. Some groups based on racial or ethnic identity seek government pro- tection for their civil and political rights. Certain faith-based groups try to use government to support their religious values by banning abortion or same-sex marriage while gun rights groups urge passage of laws to expand the right to carry firearms. Environmental groups fight for government restrictions on pollution; some agricultural groups fight to preserve the state's agricultural tax exemption.
So many groups, perhaps thousands of them, have their interests at play in the political game that we cannot describe every group and its goals individually. Instead, you should understand the broad types of interest groups that pursue influence in Texas government and policy making.
Types of Interest Groups
LO 6.1 Define interest groups and identify their major types.
Interest groups can be classified in a multitude of ways, but the simplest is to categorize them according to their primary purpose-economic, noneconomic, or mixed. Table 6.1 gives some examples of Texas interest groups in all three categories.
Economic Groups
Economic interest groups seek financial advantages for their members. Business and agricultural groups are interested in keeping their taxes low, securing subsidies, limiting regulation, and receiv ing government contracts to increase profits. Professional groups want to limit entry into their professions to reduce competition; public education groups fight against school privatization and for increased salaries and benefits for teachers. Labor unions seek better compensation, better workplace safety regulations, and laws to make it easier for workers to organize unions.
Noneconomic Groups
Noneconomic groups seek the betterment of society as a whole or the reform of the politi- cal, social, or economic systems in ways that do not directly affect their members' pocket- books. Personal or civil liberties and environmental groups maintain that the beneficiaries of their efforts are the members of society-things like personal freedom or clean air and water that cannot be directly measured entirely by self-interest. Political reform groups, such as

Table 6.1 Interest Group Classifications and Selected Examples This table shows the three types of interest groups and examples of each.
Classification
Sector
Examples
Economic
Agriculture
Texas Farm Bureau
Business
Texas Association of Business
Energy
Texas Oil and Gas Association
Hospitality
Texas Hotel & Lodging Association, Texas Restaurant Association
Labor
Texas AFL-CIO, UNITE HERE
Occupations and Professions
Texas Association of Realtors, Texas Automobile Dealers Association, Texas Medical Association
Tort Reform
Texans for Lawsuit Reform
Noneconomic
Abortion
NARAL Pro-Choice Texas, Texas Right to Life
Environment
Environment Texas, Texas League of Conservation Voters
Personal Liberties
American Civil Liberties Union of Texas, Texas State Rifle Association
Public Interest
Public Citizen Texas, Texas Values
Public Policy
Every Texan, Texas Public Policy Foundation
Mixed
Education
Texas State Teachers Association
Group Rights
Black Lives Matter, Equality Texas, League of United Latin American Citizens, Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund (MALDEF), National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), OCA-Asian Pacific American Advocates
First Responders
Combined Law Enforcement Associations of Texas (CLEAT), Texas State Association of Fire Fighters
Visit these groups' websites, find out which public policies they advocate, and then use their policy agendas to show the difference between economic and noneconomic interest groups.
Public Citizen, think of themselves as "public interest" groups because they believe that they are literally acting on behalf of the public. Many individuals who join noneconomic interest groups are motivated by personal values and intense passion, such as members of the Texas Right to Life interest group, who have strong beliefs about conception and when life begins.

Public Citizen, think of themselves as “public interest” groups because they believe that they are literally acting on behalf of the public. Many individuals who join noneconomic interest groups are motivated by personal values and intense passion, such as members of the Texas Right to Life interest group, who have strong beliefs about conception and when life begins.
Mixed Groups Many groups do not fit neatly into either the economic or noneconomic classification because they pursue social goals that also have clear economic effects. Groups fighting discrimination on the basis of age, disability, ethnicity, race, gender, or sexual orientation argue that such practices are not only a form of social injustice but also an economic problem that affects wag


and promotions in the workplace. Groups pursuing both social equality and economic goals are classified as mixed or hybrid organizations. Few, if any, demands on the political system affect all classes of citizens equally. Any public policy comes with both costs and benefits; some will gain while others will bear an economic burden from almost any government decision.
Interest Groups’ Targets and Tactics LO 6.2 Describe how interest groups influence public policies in Texas.
Interest groups are collections of citizens with shared interests that pursue public policy goals on behalf of their members. Their interests are narrower than those of political parties. Unlike political parties, they do not nominate candidates for public office and may work with officials of both parties to secure their goals. Although interest groups sometimes endorse and support candidates for office, their primary purpose is to influence government policy makers.
Figure 6.1 Interest Groups’ Tools of Influence Interest groups adapt their tactics and the tools of influence they use depending on the part of the political system they are trying to influence. Ultimately their source of power is the ability to persuade.

nterest groups use a variety of tools to influence state decision makers, and they adapt their
tactics to target specific officials. They make face-to-face appeals to legislative and executive officials, and they file lawsuits in the courts. Interest groups use electioneering and public relations to sway elected officials by affecting public opinion. Figure 6.1 shows the major tools interest groups use to influence decision maker

Lobbying the Legislature Interest groups’ most straightforward tool for influencing public officials is contacting them directly to advocate for a particular public policy—a practice known as lobbying. Some interest groups hire individual freelance lobbyists or large lobbying firms to advocate for them on a single issue, while other interest groups employ full-time, in-house lob-byists to work exclusively for them. Table 6.2 provides a list of the top ten freelance lobbyists during the 2023 legislative session according to the widely respected Capitol Inside, which has been ranking lobbyists after each session for many years. They include Neal T. “Buddy” Jon

Table 6.2 The Top Ten Hired Guns during the 2023 Legislative Session
This table lists the leading non-in-house lobbyists during the 2023 legislative session. Lobbyists such as these are sometimes called "hired guns" because they are professional lobbyists who make their services available to a variety of groups willing to pay their fees. For a sample of how they operate see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VCrHKNNLIQQ.
Name
Lobby Firm
Neal T. "Buddy" Jones
HillCo Partners
Robert Miller
Locke Lord
Mike Toomey
Texas Lobby Partners
Luis Saenz
Saenz Public Affairs
Daniel Hodge
DTH Strategies
Lara Keel
LLK
John Pitts
Texas Star Alliance
Jay Howard
HillCo Partners
David White
Public Blueprint
Sabrina Thomas Brown
Sabrina T. Brown Consulting
Political Posts/Ties
Former State Representative; Former Chief of Staff to Speaker Gib Lewis
Former Houston METRO Chair; Former Texas Senate Aide
Former State Representative; Chief of Staff to Gov. Rick Perry & Gov. Bill Clements; Special Advisor to Gov. Greg Abbott
Former Chief of Staff of Gov. Greg Abbott, Former Campaign Manager of Gov. Rick Perry; Former Asst. Secretary of State
Former Chief of Staff and Campaign Manager for Gov. Greg Abbott and AG Greg Abbott
Former State Senate Aide; Former in-house lobbyist for the Texas Association of Business and Chambers of Commerce
Former General Counsel to Lt. Gov. Bob Bullock; Twin Brother of Former House Appropriations Chair, Former Campaign Manager of John Sharp
Son of Former State Representative and Senator; Former Federal Insurance Administrator
Former Advisor to Texas Comptroller Susan Combs; Former Texas House Aide
Former Texas House Aide
Capitol Inside, "Texas Lobby Power Rankings 2023" (2023), https://capitolinside.com/lobby2023-mainxxx.html.
What are some of the common political posts occupied by these leading "hired guns" prior to the launch of their present career as a lobbyist? How would these experiences enhance their careers as lobbyists?

of HillCo Partners; Robert Miller, head of the public law practice of Locke Lord LLP; Mike Toomey (see the Texas Insiders feature later in the chapter), and Luis Saenz, Daniel Hodge and Lara Keel who each run their own respective boutique lobbying firms. Of the ten, three have served as advisors to Governor Greg Abbott, including two of the younger hired guns on this list, Luis Saenz and Daniel Hodge. All have experience working in the Texas executive or legislative branches or close family members with long experience in government. Whether lobbyists work for a single client or have a massive client list to serve, they use a vari-ety of strategies to influence different branches of government. In this chapter, we will go inside lobbying operations to explore some of their most effective techniques to win legislators over to their positions. We will then demonstrate how they are able to bring members of the executive branch and bureaucrats around to their views on public policy.
Preparing to Lobby Before a legislative session begins, a lobbyist must have success-fully completed several tasks: (1) learn which legislators are predisposed to support the cause, which legislators are on the other side, and which legislators can be swayed; (2) memorize the faces of the members, their nonlegislative occupations, the communities they represent, and a little about their families; (3) establish rapport through contact with the members of the legislature; (4) get to know the staffs of legislators because members can be influenced through them; and (5) know the legislative issues, including the arguments of opponents. Lobbyists must plan a strategy for approaching legislators. How do lobbyists approach
members of the legislature or the Texas House and Senate leadership? How do they get in the door, and what do they say once they get in? How much influence does a legislator’s staff have on the member’s decisions? Is it necessary to see all 181 members of the legislature, the lieutenant governor, and the governor? Because a session lasts only 140 days, interest groups’ best lobbyists know that lobbying
should begin long before the legislative session officially begins. The 19-month period between regular sessions provides lobbyists with ample time to work on relationships, learn what pro-posals have a chance of passing, draft legislative proposals, and line up sponsors to introduce bills in the Texas House and Senate during the next session.
Socializing Personality can be a valuable asset to a successful lobbyist. Anyone who directly contacts public officials to influence their behavior should be extroverted and enjoy socializing; after all, the lobbyist’s first job is to become known and trusted by legislators and any executive branch officials who have jurisdiction over the interest he or she represents. Lobbyists organize social functions with legislators to allow them to interact in comfortable
settings. A lobbyist may invite legislators to lunch or to a party to begin building a personal relationship of mutual trust. Attending an occasional social event with legislators, however, is not in itself enough to win their trust. Most successful lobbyists spend years cultivating long-standing relationships with decision makers.
Using Tools of Persuasion Socializing does not obligate legislators to support lob-byists’ proposals, but it does open the door for lobbyists to gain access to legislators, which at least gives them the chance to make their case. Once in the door, lobbyists find their most effective tool is providing information that is useful to a legislator—the facts are often persuasive. To maintain a relationship, the lobbyist must build the legislator’s trust, which means providing sound, accurate information about the legislation the lobbyist is supporting or opposing. This includes “off-the-record” admission of the pluses and minuses of the legis-lation. Honesty is, in fact, the best policy for a lobbyist when dealing with a public official. Lobbyists find that framing the issues in terms of the public interest affects how legislators react, and they try to define their positions before their opponents have a chance to cast them in a negative light

Lobbyists appeal to legislators’ emotions and to their ideologies, or basic philosophies of gov-ernment. Lobbyists may gently remind legislators of their interest group’s support in the legislators’ past election campaigns or delicately imply the potential for future support. Although lobbyists may not legally offer legislators financial support in exchange for their vote on a bill, it is often simply understood that groups use their resources to help elect legislative candidates who support their interests. Our Texas Insiders feature on page 148 puts a face on one of the most successful lobbyists in Texas over the past decade, Mike Toomey, co-founder of the Texas Lobby Partners.
Targeting Key Legislators Not all members of the legislature are equal, and lobby-ists target those with the greatest impact on bills critical to the lobbyist’s agenda. Establishing rapport and obtaining feedback from the very powerful presiding officers—the speaker of the house and lieutenant governor—are especially useful. No endorsement is more important to an interest group than that of the presiding officers. If an endorsement for the group’s legisla-tive proposal is not forthcoming, the lobbyist must persuade the presiding officers to at least remain neutral in the legislative struggle. Getting the endorsement of the chair of each com-mittee through which the legislation must pass before it can go to the floor for a vote is an advantage second only to that of winning the support of the presiding officers. Arranging for experts to testify at legislative committee hearings can also be crucial. Lobbyists know that com-mittee hearings are an ideal forum in which to make their case to key legislators, and most witnesses at these hearings represent interest group viewpoin

Influencing the Executive Branch Interest groups try to influence the Texas Legislature because it creates, finances, and defines government programs, but they also target the executive branch, where enormous sums of money, privilege, and prestige are also at stake, and interest groups work tirelessly to influ-ence the governor’s policies (see the Texas Insiders feature). The governor affects policy by appointing officers to head state agencies, and state agencies themselves wield a great deal of power as they award contracts and develop regulations.
Targeting the Rule-Making Process The legislature gives the executive branch and its administrative agencies responsibility for implementation, or carrying out, broad public policies, enforcing state laws, providing public services, and managing day-to-day government activities. The legislature allows executive agencies a great deal of flexibility as to how to enforce the law; they have administrative discretion, which is wide latitude to make decisions within the broad requirements set out in the law. The legislative branch authorizes administrative agencies to establish detailed rules or regulations that determine how the law shall be applied to actual situations. Agencies publish proposed rules for public comment in the Texas Register, the official publi-cation of the state that gives the public notice of proposed actions and adopted policies of execu-tive branch agencies. All citizens have the right to comment in the rule-making process, but, in reality, only those aware of and interested in a proposed rule participate. Ordinary citizens do not subscribe to the Texas Register, but corporations, labor unions, law firms, and interest groups do. Organized interest groups have a real stake in shaping these regulations that control how they do business and directly affect their profits. Hence, they know when to send their lobbyists and paid experts to give testimony at public hearings, and they are able to mobilize their members to call or write agencies about proposed rul

implementation
The process of administrative agencies carrying out broad public policies, enforcing state laws, providing public services, and managing day-to-day government activities.
discretion
Wide latitude to make decisions within the broad requirements set out in the law.

Mike Toomey: Texas Lobby Partners and Influence in the Executive Branch
Mike Toomey is the consummate insider in the executive branch and few lobby outfits can claim more influence than Texas Lobby Partners. Toomey has since been consistently rated among the top "hired gun" lobbyists by Capitol Insider.
Image 6.1 Mike Toomey's career in lobbying and government service is featured at the Texas Lobby Partners website: texaslobbypartners.com.
Texas Lobby Partners
After beginning his political career as a legislator in the 1980s, Toomey became a lobbyist and a force to be reckoned with as he moved seamlessly from his role as lobbyist into governmental roles. Toomey became then-Governor Clements' chief of staff where he exercised enough behind-the-scenes power to be labeled "Governor Toomey" by his fellow political operatives. Afterward, he once again left government service to become a key figure in "The Lobby," a group of major influencers in Texas government, who often sat in a section of the gallery of the House of Representatives known ironically as "the owners' box."
Toomey developed a mutually beneficial relationship with former Governor Rick Perry. Both as lobbyist and Perry's chief of staff


from 2002 to 2004, he capitalized on his long-term friendship with the governor to effectively represent his clients, while Perry benefited from Toomey's skillful fundraising and adept political strategies. Many of Perry's greatest successes and failures bear Toomey's fingerprints. Most recently, Toomey served as the Chief Operations Officer of Governor Greg Abbott's Strike Force to Open Texas after the COVID-19 Shutdown in 2020.
Toomey played a pivotal role in the Republicans' taking control of the Texas House in the 2002 election by raising enormous sums from the Texas Association of Business and his other clients like AT&T and Aetna. Those same contributors also helped fund Perry's campaigns for governor and the presidency. Toomey successfully lobbied the legislature to pass Perry's signature legislation to limit the damage awards that plaintiffs can receive in court.
Toomey has continued to exert significant influence on both the legislative and executive branches as the leading lobbyist for Texas Lobby Partners whose clients in 2023 included the Associated Builders and Contractors of Texas, AT&T, the City of Houston, Energy Transfer Partners, the Las Vegas Sands Corporation, the Texas Hotel and Lodging Association, and a host of other major companies, trade associations and governmental entities.
CSQ Thinking about the role of elites in Texas politics
Write a carefully constructed essay to describe the techniques that lobby firms such as Texas Lobby Partners use to convince policy makers to support their clients' positions. To make your essay thorough, be sure to include each of the services listed on the Texas Lobby Partners website and explain how lobbyists' personal relationships, developed through years of contacts with policy makers, affect the decision-making process.

Agency administrators actively seek input about the
impact of their rules and policies from the groups they regulate. The Texas Department of Insurance needs to know how its proposed rules will affect the insurance industry; the Texas Railroad Commission will want to know how new hydraulic fracturing rules will affect the drilling industry’s use of “fracking” to extract oil and gas, and the Texas Real Estate Commission consults with the Texas Association of Realtors before adopting new licens-ing requirements.
Targeting the Appointment Process Lob-byists are actively involved in the appointment process, and they are often able to convince the governor to select agency heads who are friendly to their interests. Most state agencies are headed by boards and commissions recruited from the industry, profession, or group they regulate—they share the same interests. In fact, Texas law requires that many regulatory boards must include members of the business or profession that they regulate. For example, twelve of the nineteen members of the Texas Medical Board must be physicians. Upon retirement or departure from government service,
many agency officers go to work for the very industries that they once regulated. Critics doubt that administra-tive officers can regulate their own business or profession and, at the same time, serve the public interest, especially when they intend to return to the same profession. At least one observer has concluded that “the state’s business and
political elites are hopelessly intertwined.”

Co-opting State Agencies Such a close working relationship develops between interest groups and state agencies that agencies often view the interest groups that they regu-late as their clients; such interest groups are often called clientele groups. These are the groups most affected by a government agency’s regulations and programs, and they frequently form close alliances with the agency based on mutual support and accommodation. Lobbyists for clientele groups often defend “their” state agency as well as its funding and
legal powers. This blurring of the line between the state agencies and a special interest group is called co-optation (also known as agency capture) when such a close alliance develops between state regulatory agencies and their clientele group that the regulated have, in effect, become the regulators. The interest group has captured such complete control of their regula-tory agency that they are essentially self-regulated. A classic example of co-optation, or agency capture, is seen in an effort by the Texas
Racing Commission (TRC) to unilaterally authorize horse racing and dog racing tracks to operate slot machines. The Texas racing industry was in the midst of a significant finan-cial crisis, with the last of the state’s dog racing tracks closing at the end of 2015 and its three major horse racing tracks—Lone Star Park in Grand Prairie (DFW), Retama Park in San Antonio, and Sam Houston Park in Houston—in dire straits. The racing industry saw
“historical racing” machines, which are the functional equivalent of slot machines, as a partial way out of their financial dilemma

clientele groups
The groups most affected by a government agency's regulations and programs; frequently these interest groups form close alliances with the agency based on mutual support and accommodation.
co-optation
Development of such a close alliance between state regulatory agencies and their clientele group that the regulated have, in effect, become the regulators; the interest group has captured such complete control of their regulatory agency that they are essentially self-regulated.

At the behest of “their” industry, the co-opted or captured TRC in August 2014 authorized
the operation of “historical racing” machines at racetracks, a move that was immediately challenged on very solid grounds as unconstitutional (see Chapter 2) by citizens and state legislators alike. The result was a more than two-year legal and budgetary standoff between the TRC and the Texas Legislature, a standoff that was eventually resolved in February 2016 when the TRC in a narrow 5–4 vote backed down and repealed the rule allowing historical racing, without any machines ever being installed at tracks. This repeal, however, took place only after Governor Abbott had the opportunity to replace several TRC members as their terms expired. The Texas Railroad Commission provides another example of where a state regulatory
agency has been captured by industry, in this case by the coal industry. Among its many regulatory duties (see Chapter 8), the Texas Railroad Commission is responsible for insuring that coal mining operations carry out reclamation projects to restore land to its former condi-tion once its coal mining activities are completed. A joint Texas Tribune and Grist investigation revealed how the Texas Railroad Commis-sion’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Division had been captured by the coal mining indus-try.2
Coal mining companies were allowed to meet standards with only minimal cleanup
efforts, saving the mining companies millions of dollars. The result, however, was thousands of acres of contaminated, abandoned coal-mining land remaining in Texas’s lignite coal belt stretching from Atascosa County in South Texas through Grimes County in Central Texas to Titus County in Northeast Texas. These contaminated lands contain a host of toxic chemicals that leach into the groundwater and soil and threaten the health of local residents, livestock, and wild life. Why would an agency charged with serving the public and regulating the coal industry
to ensure that it fulfilled its legal and societal obligations to the community allow the coal industry to a shirk its responsibility? One answer may be found in who the Railroad Com-mission hired in 2016 to run its Surface Mining and Reclamation Division, Denny Kingsley, a former coal executive who had just retired from a 36-year career in the industry that he was now charged with regulating. Kingsley was fired at the end of 2018 for retaliating against staffers who were not aligned with his pro-industry agenda. But, Kingsley landed on his feet, with a current job advising the Black Walnut Management Company, which owns a mine he was responsible for regulating during his tenure at the Texas Railroad Commission.
Targeting the Courts Lobbying is one extremely important interest group tool, but interest groups employ a wide variety of other tactics to influence government policy making as well. For example, inter-est groups do not directly lobby judges, but they actively campaign for judicial candidates who share their viewpoints, they prevail upon the governor to fill court vacancies with friendly judicial appointees, and they file suit in court to win legal rulings that benefit their interests.
Influencing the Judicial Selection Process Texas is one of a handful of states that elect their trial and appeals court judges in partisan elections, as you will see in Chapter 9. Candidates must first win the party’s nomination in the primary and then prevail in the general election. Voters who elect judges do not usually have a clear understanding of the law or how it should be applied; instead, they depend on party labels and political cam-paigns to give them voting cues. Business groups and law firms, many of them having legal business before the courts, contribute large amounts to judicial campaigns. In 2022, the candidates in races fo

hree positions on the Texas Supreme Court raised a combined $3.2 million. Critics argue that large contributions from pro-busi-ness interest groups and corporate law firms have influ-enced judicial decisions, shifting legal precedent in favor of corporations and putting procedural hurdles in the way of consumers and workers who might sue them. Even the U.S. Supreme Court recognizes that very large con-tributions to judicial candidates creates a risk that judges will be biased in deciding cases in which megadonors are involved. Between elections, some judges resign or retire, and
the governor is charged with filling the resulting vacancy until the next election. Because such temporary judicial appointees usually seek and win election to full terms, interest groups set up massive lobbying efforts to per-suade the governor to appoint judges favorable to their interests. Many Texas judges were first recruited in this way by interest groups that have much to gain or lose from court rulings.
Filing Suit in Court Major corporations, insur-ance companies, and powerful professional groups employ attorneys on their staffs or have law firms on retainer to defend their interests when workers and con-sumers sue them. Influential interests also bring law-suits to challenge government policies that harm their interests. They may win court rulings that declare hos-tile legislation is unconstitutional or that inconvenient executive decisions are illegal. Courts might interpret a law or administrative rule in such a way that it works to a group’s advantage. In the past, smaller and less powerful organizations
turned to the courts as a last resort after they had lost policy battles in the legislative or executive branches. In recent years, however, changes in the state’s political cli-mate, passage of lawsuit reforms, and decisions by the state supreme court have made Texas courts less responsive to groups representing environmentalists, consumers, and ethnic and racial minorities. Some of these groups now simply view filing lawsuits in state courts as a tactic to attract public attention and media coverage of their cause. Some of these groups historically have turned instead
to the federal courts to enforce environmental and con-sumer protection policies. Chapters 1 and 4 show that various groups have in the past won federal court deci-sions that protect voting rights and civil rights, though recent federal court decisions have not always favored these grou

Fundraising Reception for JUDGE MARICELA MOORE 162nd Civil District Court
Tonight, Wednesday, February 12, 2020
5:30 to 7:30pm
Winston & Strawn 2121 N Pearl Street Dallas, Texas 75201
DONATIONS:
Donate at the event, donate online, or donate by mail to: Judge Maricela Moore Campaign 7324 Gaston Ave. Ste. 124-353 Dallas, Texas 75214
SPONSOR:
Platinum $5000, Gold $2500, Silver $1000, Bronze $500, Copper $250, Supporter $100
THANKS TO HOSTS & SPONORS
ORGANIZING HOSTS
Arlene J. Ford Debra Haster John
Veronica Lewis
Tracey M. Preston
Julia A. Simon
PLATINUM
GOLD
Mark Alexander Crain Brogdon Rogers LLP
Peter Kr
Sean Modjarral Reed Smith LLP
Patricia Villarval
Sifford Anderson PC
SILVER
Condon Tobin Sladek Thornton Teamsters Local 245 DRIVE PAC
Bell Nunnally & Martin LLP
Sean McCaffity Tex Quesada
Shamoun & Norman LLP Andrew Sommerman
Jeff Benton
Michael Guajardo Tom Melsheimer
Payma Kuhnel & Smith PC
Handin Ramey
Vinson & Elkins LLP
age 6.3 This image is an invitation to a draising reception for Judge Maricela Moore successfully ran for reelection in Dallas County 020. Supporters had the option of different ation levels. Among those contributing at least 000 were more than two dozen lawyers and law s that either had or could in the future have l business before her.
TO What potential problems can you see with judges receiving campaign contributions from attorneys who may appear before them in a legal case?

Shaping the Political Environment Besides working to influence state policy makers directly, interest groups strive to shape the political environment in which policy deci-sions are made. Interest groups are most effective when they have the support of the public as well as of industry and community leaders, and they engage in political campaigns and other public relations efforts to create a political climate favorable to their agendas.
Electioneering Interest groups use their resources to support candidates disposed toward their interests. They endorse and recom-mend that their members vote for the candidate most aligned with their values; the organizations’ newsletters, social media accounts, and websites carry messages of support for their chosen candidates. Endorsements from organizations with a large and committed fol-lowing, like the National Rifle Association or Texas Right to Life, have the greatest impact. Teachers’ organizations, organized labor, and other activists sometimes help their favorite candidates by providing campaign workers who go door-to-door, operate phone banks, engage with potential voters on social media, and hand out literature and yard signs. Officeholders are responsive to interest groups’ potential voting
★ CTQ Why would ethnic, racial, and political minorities press their interests in the courts rather than the legislative or executive branches?
power, the value of their endorsements, and the number of their mem-bers who may volunteer in the next election campaign. As a result, interest groups are most influential when they represent members on what political strategists call “voting issues”—that is, single issues, such as opposition to gun control or abortion, about which members feel so passionately as to be decisive for them in determining how they will cast their ballots. Other groups may represent members who by and large favor gun control or protecting the environment, but most of their members rarely decide how to vote based on these single issues alone.
Contributing to Campaigns Interest groups may also be influential because they provide money—a key resource in cam-paigns. Executives of banks, insurance companies, the petrochemical industry, and utility companies make large individual contributions
and also contribute through political action committees, or PACs, that were discussed in Chapter 4. Professional groups such as physicians, trial lawyers, real estate agents, and teachers also form PACs that aggregate contributions into large sums, which they funnel to their favorite candidates. Most campaign contributions for the state legislature and the statewide offices come from
access
The ability to “get in the door” to sit down and talk to public officials. Campaign contributions are often used to gain access.
large donors. These campaign contributors give large amounts because the state legislature, the governor, and other elected officials make decisions that affect these donors’ economic well-being and their other interests. Donors contribute to gain access to public officials, meaning their lobbyists are able to “get in the door” to sit down and talk to officials about their needs. Substantial contributions seem to create an obligation on the part of an elected official to listen when a contributor calls. Ordinary citizens find access much more difficult to obtain. During the 2022 electoral cycle in Texas, a total of $558 million were raised by


tate-level candidates, much of it from PACs. On the following page, Table 6.3 lists the top twenty-five PACs in terms of contributions to candidates running for Texas state legislative and statewide office during the 2022 cycle. Money in politics is the hot topic of the day because
of how the startling amount of money candidates raise and spend in campaigns for elective office at all levels has skyrocketed. State legislative candidates raised $180 million in the 2022 election cycle. The 414 candidates vying for seats in the Texas House raised $115 million, and the 78 candidates for the Texas Senate raised $55

Educating the Public Interest groups shape the political climate by providing the general public with messages designed to build a positive image and to promote their view-points. Well-funded interest groups employ the services of public relations firms to promote policy agendas even as they burnish their reputations for honesty, good citizenship, and concern for the well-being of others. Interest groups may use their organizations’ magazines, annual reports, press releases,
and social media campaigns as vehicles for building their own reputation and educating the public about the wisdom of policy proposals their organi-zations support. They may purchase print, broadcast, and digital advertising to shape and mobilize public opinion, and many interest groups now sponsor local “grassroots” organizations and political blogs that share their policy views.
Organizing Public Demonstrations Some interest groups organize marches and demonstrations to generate publicity for their cause. Press and social media coverage is all but guaranteed because demonstrations create a sort of “theater” that is especially well suited for television news and online videos on media sites, You-Tube, and other venues. When the legislature is in ses-sion, demonstrations are plentiful. Public school teachers, abortion-rights organizations, immigrants’ rights groups, and countless others rally in Austin to express their opin-ion on a whole host of bills. Using this kind of tactic is a challenge for interest
groups that must enlist enough members to be impressive, and at the same time, keep control of the demonstration. Violating the law, blocking traffic, and damaging prop-erty do not win support from fellow citizens or public officials. Although some groups have used these tactics, most have found civil and sincere protests to be more effective


Interest groups have a clear advantage if they are well organized at the grassroots level, if
they are able to muster public sympathies, and if they can mobilize large numbers of sup-porters to contact officials. Some special interest groups have used their financial advantages to orchestrate public demonstrations and social media campaigns designed to give the impression of widespread and spontaneous “grassroots” support for their positions. Such public demonstrations have been dubbed astroturf lobbying after the original artificial turf used in sports stadiums, including Houston’s Astrodome (the world’s first domed stadium) from which the turf got its name.
The Balance of Political Power
LO 6.3 Analyze the political balance of power among interest groups in Texas.
Business and professional groups continue to be the most powerful interests in the state, and they are frequently aligned with the majority Republican Party. Generally speaking, the most successful noneconomic interest groups are socially conservative and have agendas that substantially align with business interests. Environmental groups, organized labor, civil rights organizations, and groups advocating for low-income Texans often support policies at odds with business and usually ally themselves with the minority Democratic Party. Such groups have comparatively less influence over the public policy process in Texas than business and conservative ideological groups.
Texas’s Most Powerful Interest Groups One way of gauging which groups have the greatest sway in state government is by look-ing at the amount of money they devote to lobbying state officials. Figure 6.2 shows that the energy and natural resources business accounted for 18 percent (or $48 million) of all lobbying contracts as compiled from official reports in 2021. The health, finance, and communications industries were also among the biggest spenders on lobbying. Among the top individual businesses spending the most on lobbying were energy and utility companies including AT&T, American Electric Power, Oncor, and Centerpoint Energy. Obviously, such companies have an intense interest in state utility regulation, such as to what extent the state requires them to weatherize their infrastructure. Many smaller interests join together into umbrella organizations, in which industries,
wholesalers, producers, retailers, and professionals form associations to promote common policy goals by making campaign contributions and hiring lobbyists to represent their interests. For example, the Texas Association of Realtors, Texas Trial Lawyers Association, Associate General Contractors of Texas, Texas Medical Association, Texas Association of Manufacturers, and the Wholesale Beer Distributors of Texas together spent more than $6.5 million lobbying on behalf of their members in 2021. The Wholesale Beer Distributors focused its lobbying efforts in 2021 (and in 2023) on maintaining Texas’s three tier alcoholic beverage industry under which beer manufacturers cannot sell directly to retailers, but instead have to sell to the distributors who in turn sell to the retailers. The Texas Association of Business, Texas Automobile Dealers Association, Texas Medi-cal Association, Texas Realtors, Texas Oil and Gas Association, and the Associated General Contractors of Texas have been traditionally regarded as being among the most powerfu


gure 6.2 Lobby Spending in Texas This figure shows which interests spent the most on lobbying in Texas. Various industries spent about $260 million for lobbying in 2021 according to tallies by the National Institute on Money in State Politic

organizations because they have the money to maintain permanent headquarters in Austin and employ clerical and research staffs as well as lobbyists to make their prominence known. Such special interests have full-time staff, multiple lobbyists, and the ability to disburse siz-able campaign contributions. They often achieve more than resource-poor groups, but other factors also tend to affect which interest groups win the influence game. Most registered lobbyists represent business, but business is a huge category, encompass-ing both the powerful and the weak. Not everyone in business shares the same viewpoint. Independent and small businesses frequently seek policy outcomes opposed by larger enter-prises. Trucking interests are often at odds with railroad freight businesses; oil and gas companies have a different perspective from renewable energy companies. Business should not be thought of as monolithic. Powerful business groups may win more than they lose, but they do not own the government and are not guaranteed succes


A Case Study in Interest-Group Activity: The Las Vegas Sands’ Effort to Legalize Casino Gambling in Texas Chapter 2 discussed Texas’s constitutional ban on casino gambling, which makes the Lone Star State an outlier in the United States as one of only five states in which casino gambling remains prohibited. Casino gambling interests have for decades made multiple attempts to obtain the coveted passage of a Texas House or Senate joint resolution that would put a constitutional amendment to allow casino gambling in Texas on the ballot for the public to accept or reject (all polls indicate that a substantial majority of Texans would vote in favor of a casino gambling amendment). The hurdle that has traditionally thwarted the casino gambling lobby is the requirement that any casino gambling joint resolution be approved by a two-thirds majority in both the Texas House and the Texas Senate. Over the past four years, the Las Vegas Sands Corporation has mounted a very well-funded and well-coordinated effort to open up the last major untapped casino gambling market in the United States, Texas. During the 2021 legislative session the Las Vegas Sands hired 75 lobbyists at a cost of over $5 million to promote its pro-casino gambling agenda, and for the 2023 legislative session it expanded its number of lobbyists to 88, at an estimated cost of over $10 million. And, prior to the 2023 legislative session, the Las Vegas Sands laid the groundwork for its
2023 lobbying efforts by donating money to 126 of the 150 state representatives and 25 of the 31 state senators who would serve during the 2023 regular session. All together, the Las Vegas Sands gave $3.2 million to Texas state-level candidates during the 2022 election cycle, including donations of $300,000 to House Speaker Dade Phelan, $225,000 to Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick, and $200,000 to Governor Greg Abbott, with Las Vegas Sands owner Miriam Adelson also making a $1,000,000 dollar donation to Abbott

Prior efforts to legalize casino gambling in Texas often failed at least in part due to infighting within the pro-casino gambling camp, with the destination casino lobby only wanting a small number of destination casinos, the horse and greyhound tracks only wanting casino gambling allowed at existing race tracks, and the state's three Native American tribal casinos wary of being marginalized by any changes to the status quo.
Over the past two legislative sessions, however, the Las Vegas Sands and its allies in the Texas Destination Resort Alliance (TXDRA) had very effectively worked to craft legislation that provided benefits for all of the principal industry players, who in the past often have worked at cross-purposes.
Casino gambling legislation made it further in the Texas Legislature in 2023 than at any time in history. That said, the 2023 regular legislative session ended with casino gambling still illegal in Texas.
Even before the 2023 legislative session was under- way, the Las Vegas Sands Corporation and its casino gambling allies had achieved something that had never occurred before: both the governor (Greg Abbott) and House speaker (Dade Phelan) publicly came out in favor of the destination resort-based casino gambling

legislation supported by the Las Vegas Sands and its allies. The only holdout was Lieuten-ant Governor Dan Patrick, who continued to believe that the social costs caused by the legalization of casino gambling outweighed the benefits it would provide. Multiple casino gambling bills were filed in 2023, but the one which gained the most
traction and had the seal of approval of the Las Vegas Sands was House Joint Resolution 155 (HJR 155) authored by Representative Charlie Geren (R-Fort Worth), a key member of the Texas House leadership team of Speaker Dade Phelan. HJR 155 attempted to resolve the internal conflict that had undermined past legislative efforts to pass casino gambling legislation by providing something for everyone in its establishment of eight destination resort casinos across Texas.


Two destination resort casinos would be located in the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) metro area, two in the Houston metro area, one in the San Antonio metro area, one in the Corpus Christi metro area, and one in the Rio Grande Val- ley (RGV). One final casino could be located in a metro area other than these five, as long as it was more than 100 miles away from all of these five metro areas and a major- ity of the voters in a November HJR 155 constitutional amendment election voted in favor of the amendment to legalize casino gambling in the county where the casino

would be located. The distance criterion would exclude the Austin metro area, but would leave an opening for the next most populous metro area not explicitly included in the legislation, El Paso, as well as other metro areas such as Lubbock and Amarillo. The leg-islation also guaranteed that the three Native American tribal casinos would be able to offer casino gaming. The legislation gained the support of the state’s horse and dog racetracks by providing
them with privileged access to obtain casino licenses. It also established a sufficiently large minimum investment threshold for the most lucrative DFW and Houston markets ($2 billion), along with destination resort casino experience requirements, that it virtu-ally ensured that the Las Vegas Sands would get one of the DFW casinos and Tilman Fertitta (owner of the Golden Nugget Casino franchise, Landry’s Inc., and the Houston Rockets) would get one of the Houston casinos. Proponents of the casino gambling legislation highlighted the benefits which the estab-lishment of these eight destination casinos would provide Texas. These benefits included approximately 50,000 full-time jobs and 25,000 temporary construction jobs and billions in tax revenue that would be used to support public education, public health, and public safety. Opponents of the casino gambling legislation highlighted the negative externalities
that would be caused by the establishment of destination casino resorts in metro areas which combined contain more than two-thirds of the state’s population. These include the increased social welfare problems related to problem gamblers such as personal bank-ruptcy, spousal abuse, child abuse, job absenteeism, eviction and homelessness. These opponents also highlighted the prospects for increased human trafficking, drug use, robbery, and other crimes that have been found to rise with the legalization of casinos in other states. HJR 155 was successfully voted out of the Texas House State Affairs committee on May
5 and reached the House floor for debate on May 10, where in its second passage vote it received 92 yes votes, 51 no votes and 2 present votes, with four representatives absent. At

the time of this vote the Texas House had 149 members (Representative Bryan Slaton had been expelled a few days earlier), 85 Republicans (including Speaker Phelan who under House custom generally does not cast roll call votes) and 64 Democrats. An overwhelming majority of Democrats voted in favor of the legislation, with 52 voting yes and 8 voting no, with three absent and one voting present. The Republican delegation was evenly split, with 40 Republicans voting yes and 43 voting no, with the speaker voting present and one Republican absent (although indicating in the House journal that he would have voted yes had he been on the floor). The Republican opponents cited the negative social consequences of casino gam-bling as the principal reason for their opposition. The handful of Democratic opponents included those who shared the Republican concern about the social consequences of casino gambling as well as others whose opposition was targeted more at the financial benefits the legislation would provide for large corporations and the lack of explicit pro-tection for casino workers in the legislation. And one Democrat, Representative Eddie Morales Jr. of Eagle Pass, opposed the legislation because it would likely put the Kicka-poo Lucky Eagle tribal casino in his hometown of Eagle Pass out of business due to the competition from the new destination resort casinos in San Antonio, the RGV, and Corpus Christi. The majority second vote was sufficient to move HJR 155 along to a third and final vote
the next day, but short of the 100 vote super-majority (two-thirds of the House members) needed for the passage of the legislation to place the constitutional amendment on the November 2023 ballot. Casino gambling supporters on the evening of May 10 thus found themselves short of the 100 votes needed for final passage, and due to their failure to round up the additional votes, Geren never brought the bill back to the House floor for a final passage vote on May 11 or later. One factor that hindered the ability of Geren and other casino gambling supporters to obtain these additional votes was the very clear message from Lieutenant Governor Patrick that any casino gambling legislation would be dead on arrival in the Texas Senate. When the 2023 Texas Legislature’s regular session ended on May 29, optimistic casino
gambling proponents could point to the achievement of getting casino gambling legislation to the House floor for a vote and falling less than 10 votes short of passage. Pessimistic casino gambling proponents could however point to the legislation’s overall failure and inability to gain a majority of the Republican vote on the House floor along with Patrick’s steadfast opposition, all of this in spite of the tens of millions of dollars which casino gam-bling advocates have spent over the past few years in campaign contributions, lobbying, and advertising.
Interest Group Alliances and the Dynamics of Power On issues that are narrow in scope, a single group may find itself unopposed. In the legis-lature, the interest group must persuade only a few key people, such as legislative commit-tee chairs and presiding officers, to win a floor vote. Administrative agency decisions are even more likely to be controlled by a few interest groups because their decisions usually have a concentrated impact on a single occupation or business sector. For example, real estate brokers are very directly affected by the Real Estate Board’s licensing requirements and are extremely active in trying to influence board decisions; the public is affected by the standards the board sets, but few are interested enough to become involved in the process.


Iron Triangles On such narrow issues, interest groups, legislators, and bureaucrats can develop such a long-standing relationship held together by mutual self-interest that they act as a subsystem in the legislative and administrative decision-making process. Called iron triangles, these alliances operate largely outside public view because they dominate a narrow range of routine decisions that are of marginal interest to the general public but are of critical importance to the interest groups and bureaucrats involved. The clientele group uses its resources, size, lobbying skills, and access to state officials to determine policy outcomes.
For example, oil and gas interests have formed a close association with the Texas Rail- road Commission, whose members their campaign contributions help elect. The agriculture industry forms a similar symbiotic relationship with the commissioner of the Texas Depart- ment of Agriculture as well as the members of the house and senate agriculture committees. Highway contractors form an alliance with the Texas Department of Transportation and interested legislators; privately owned utility companies work closely with the Public Utilities Commission. We illustrate these alliances more extensively in Chapter 8 as we discuss the state's bureaucracy.
Issue Networks Iron triangles may dominate policies of a narrow scope, but broader public policy questions like taxes, education, health care, environmental protection, and abor- tion have the potential to activate wider-ranging coalitions. Alliances among interest groups, career bureaucrats, academics, think tanks, political bloggers, social media commentators, traditional media editors, neighborhood leaders, radio talk show hosts, and other community activists may form issue networks. These broad alliances are dynamic-different activists and interest groups organize around different public issues.
Political Movements Issue networks have the potential to blossom into a larger political movement, a mass alliance of like-minded groups and individuals seeking broad changes in the direction of government policies. When the web of opinion leaders in issue networks taps into a large set of issues important to masses of people, they may develop a large following with a fairly stable membership.
One example of a political movement is the tea party, which was not a political party at all, but a very successful political movement. Beginning among a relatively small network of activists opposing the federal bailouts of the financial industry, the tea party movement gained strength with the passage of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (popularly referred to as "The Stimulus") and finally evolved into a full-fledged anti-government move- ment by the time the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (popularly referred to as Obamacare) was passed. A small alliance of interested groups had transformed into a mass national political movement. Today, the tea party movement has been subsumed into a larger right-leaning personality-centered movement led by former president Donald Trump.
At the other end of the ideological spectrum is a political movement, Our Revolution,
founded by Bernie Sanders, an independent socialist U.S. senator from Vermont who com-
peted for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016 and 2020. Just as the conservative
movement strives to pull the Republican Party to the right, Our Revolution strives to pull the
Democratic Party to the left. During its existence, Our Revolution has had a mixed record of success. While, failing to oust Congressman Henry Cuellar (D-Laredo) in the 2022 Democratic primary, it did succeed in helping Congressman Greg Casar (D-Austin) win the 2022 Democratic primary in a reli- ably Democratic district, with Casar quickly achieving the status of being the most progressive
member of the Democratic Texas U.S. House delegation. It has also had some success both

ocally and nationally in pulling the Democratic Party to the left in policy areas ranging from climate change to health care.
Sizing Up Interest Groups and Their Influence
LO 6.4 Evaluate the role of interest groups in Texas politics and policy formulation.
Interest groups are formed by people who are exercising their fundamental constitutional rights in a free society. Both the national and Texas constitutions protect freedom of expres-sion and freedom of association, and they specifically guarantee citizens the right to assemble to petition their government “for redress of grievances.” The Texas Constitution (Article 1, Section 27) says that citizens shall have the right to “apply to those invested with the powers of government for redress of grievances or other purposes, by petition, address or remonstrance.” The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution says, “Congress shall make no law ...
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition government for redress of grievances.” These constitutional provi-sions guarantee citizens the right to join together in political parties and interest groups. The rights to form political organizations, along with the right to vote, are essential to the very existence of a democracy.
The Positive Role of Interest Groups Supporters believe that interest groups provide an essential linkage between members and public officials that makes it possible for the political system to function in a free society. They also believe that our pluralistic society, our governing structures, and our open society protect us from domination by a single narrow elite.
Representation and Mobilization Interest groups provide members a vehicle to present their values and views in ways that elections cannot. Texas elections are held every two years, but many interest groups operate continuously and offer their members the opportunity to influence day-to-day decision making. At best, elections offer voters the chance to set the general direction of government as they choose one candidate or party over the other, while interest groups develop specialized tactics to give members the chance to affect the details of policy making. Elections are held in geographic districts and statewide, but interest groups represent people according to their specialized occupational, cultural, and professional groupings, allowing them to articulate their members’ unique perspectives on public policies. Democracy calls for politically attentive and active citizens, but many voters are min-imally informed, and they cast their ballots based on broad impressions created during political campaigns. Interest groups draw the most interested and informed citizens into the political process, educate their members about issues, and mobilize them to participate in ways that advance their own interests. Interest groups report on the activities of government officials and sometimes keep vote tallies to report to their members on how legislators voted on key issues. Interest groups inform and educate public officials; they provide policy makers with
valuable information both as they lobby individual government officials and as they testify before legislative committees. Because state law makes it a crime to knowingly share false


information with state lawmakers, most special interest groups are careful to provide truth- ful, albeit often one-sided, information. Decision makers need to know how a proposed policy will affect various segments of society and how the affected groups feel about it. Interest groups enthusiastically provide this information to public officials free of cost to
taxpayers.
The Benefits of Pluralism Those who subscribe to the pluralist theory take the view that, in a free society, public policy should be made by a multitude of competing interest groups, ensuring that policies will not benefit a single elite at the expense of the many. Agri- cultural, educational, energy, environmental, ethnic and racial, medical, and religious interest groups are just some of the organized interests in Texas, and all compete with one another for the attention and favor of decision makers. Matters involving large amounts of money or important changes in existing policy invite crowds. In such situations, for anything to happen, some compromise among competing interests must occur, resulting in a mix of values incor- porated into the policy decision.
Interest groups' defenders argue that the structure of government is designed to make it hard for any group to dominate the state. The structure of government is characterized by:
• The separation of powers
• Checks and balances
• Elected officials responsible to different constituencies at the ballot box at different times
• Appointed officials with fixed terms
• Career bureaucrats
These structures make the political system difficult for any one interest to capture. The house and senate and the governor must agree to create law. The implementation of law is placed in the hands of elected and appointed executive officers and the unelected bureaucrats below them.
The media, especially in the digital age, give citizens access to an unprecedented amount of information and offer a political tool for new and underrepresented voices that otherwise lack financial and other resources to have a significant impact on policy making. Furthermore, interest groups are limited because they operate in an environment where the general public is critical, if not cynical, of the political process.
Media exposure, public opinion, and the competing power of rival interest groups can also have their effect on state policies, especially on policies of sweeping public significance. More far-reaching public policy decisions involve more participants, and the general public is more likely to take an interest. Public officials become quite sensitive to public opinion when voters, especially primary voters, take an active interest in policy decisions-they must get reelected, after all. No amount of interest group influence or campaign contributions can cause public officials to sacrifice their political futures to one group's special needs. The scope of a public policy determines who will control the decision-making process and shape the dynamics of
power.
Criticisms and Reforms
Critics are not so optimistic about the role of interest groups in the Texas political system.
They believe that interest groups are very selective in mobilizing and informing citizens
and that the resources of political influence are concentrated in the hands of a very few.
They believe that narrow interests are able to commandeer the machinery of government
for their own self-interest, and in the process they employ tactics that taint the integrity of
the political system itself.

Elitism and the Culture of Nonparticipation Many Texans come from a traditionalistic political culture that discourages political participation and defers to the power of governing elites. Many Texans are not members of any interest groups at all, and many of those who have joined groups are passive, inattentive members who leave the leadership role to a few activists.
Wealth, political contacts, access to information, and well-managed lobby operations are controlled by a few powerful interest groups that often use these resources to dominate the political process. For example, Texas has no patients' rights association that has political power comparable to that of the Texas Medical Association; organized labor's power in Texas is modest compared to that of employers' organizations like the Texas Association of Busi- ness. Consumer organizations do not rival the influence of the numerous organizations of manufacturers and retailers in the state.
Some critics believe an elitist theory of interest groups best describes Texas politics; they take the view that the state is ruled by select participants who exercise power to further their own self-interest. They contend that insurance companies, oil and gas companies, and cer- tain utilities usually have their way with the state because they are able to pour enormous resources into campaign contributions or lobbying. They believe that the average citizen cannot compete; highly organized and active groups can threaten the well-being of the unorganized majority.
Exploitation of Weak State Institutions Skeptical of government, Texans have tried to limit and divide the power of state institutions. As a result, interest groups have been able to capitalize on numerous structural weaknesses, and they have been able to take advantage of numerous points of access to assert their influence.
For example, the state legislature meets in regular session only once every other year. Legislators cannot keep up with what is happening in state government while they are not in session. They come to Austin in January of odd-numbered years and depend on full-time professional lobbyists to fill them in. Texas legislators have limited staffs or other sources of independent information, and they must often go to lobbyists for the facts. Interest groups are often the behind-the-scenes source of many bills legislators introduce.
Executive agencies often lack independent data sources and, in effect, outsource a great deal of information gathering to the interests they regulate. The Texas Department of Insur- ance depends on the insurance industry to provide claims information necessary to write regulations and set rates. The Public Utilities Commission, the Texas Railroad Commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and many other agencies rely heavily on data reported by the industries they regulate.
Reformers advocate strengthening legislative and executive institutions by providing them adequate resources and professional full-time staff. Ideally, professional staff should be competent, well-paid state employees hired based on merit and have sufficient job security to protect them against political interference. Reformers believe that only such professional staffs can provide decision makers with enough balanced and objective information to
enable them to make policy in the public interest. Besides limited staffing, low pay is also an institutional weakness that can be exploited. Paid below the poverty level, legislators must depend on outside sources of income to earn a living, making them vulnerable to the temptations of special interest groups. Many lawmak ers are attorneys who, as sitting legislators, have been known to represent special interests
before state agencies and courts. Many work for clients who have interests in pending legis-
lation, and no law requires legislators to recuse themselves even when they stand to benefit
personally from legislation under consideration.

The Revolving Door The public interest may be
compromised by the interchange of employees and officials between government institutions and the private busi- nesses with which they have dealings-a peculiar practice referred to as the revolving door. This practice can com- promise the independence of public employees who are recruited from private businesses because they may con- tinue to pursue their former employer's interests once in public office. Furthermore, government officials who leave their positions to join private organizations may have out- sized influence on the decisions of their former colleagues in government.
As a result, the federal government and a number of states also require "cooling-off" periods before bureaucrats leaving the executive branch can become lobbyists, but Texas does not. And, although 35 other states have some ban on legislators becoming lobbyists immediately after leaving office, Figure 6.3 on the following page shows Texas has no such restrictions.
In Texas, as ambitious legislators and executive officials retire and move on to other occupations, many become lobbyists for the very interest groups they once regulated.

To be certain, few people would be better suited to serve as lobbyists than ex-lawmakers.
Former legislators are intricately familiar with the legislative process, many are policy experts, and they often have friendships with lawmakers who are still in office. Interest groups also seek to hire retiring state agency officials as lobbyists because of their familiarity with the policy-making process, their policy expertise, and their connections inside state government.
Former Republican state representative Chris Paddie of Marshall served in the Texas House between 2013 and 2022. He led the Texas House's response to the 2021 collapse of the Texas electrical grid (see Chapter 2), playing a crucial role in drafting and shepherding legislation related to the state's electrical grid, earning the criticism of some elected officials such as Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, who accused Paddie at the time of acting more on the behalf of the power companies than on that of the Texas public. Upon leaving office, Paddie became a lobbyist for more than a half dozen power companies, including Luminent, TXU, and the North American Coal Corporation. Faced with public criticism of his new role as a lobbyist and following a formal rebuke by the Texas Ethics Commission, Paddie agreed to stop lob- bying during the 2023 legislative session.
The revolving door may create opportunities for retiring public officials, but it also creates the potential for conflict of interest, a situation in which public officers stand to benefit personally from their official decisions. Lawmakers and bureaucrats, planning their next career move, might be tempted to make decisions that will benefit prospective employers. It is fairly common for interest groups to hire public officials as lobbyists after they have made policy decisions in their favor.
Critics wonder how many unscrupulous officials are using public service as a training school or stepping-stone to a more lucrative career as a lobbyist. "People rightfully wonder when did they stop being a lawmaker and when did they start to become a special interest lobbyist."

How Does Texas Compare?
Lobby Regulations: Closing the Revolving Door for Legislators
In order to eliminate actual or apparent conflicts of interest that we have discussed, most states have passed laws to limit the revolving door between the legislative branch and lobbyists. While fifteen states (including Texas) have no state statutes requiring a "cooling-off" period for persons leaving the legislature to become lobbyists, half of the states require retiring legislators to wait up to one year before serving as lobbyists. Some states require even more time; Florida recently adopted the strictest requirement, a six-year hiatus between
service in the legislature and the right to register as a lobbyist.
Many states have gone further in recognizing ethics issues regarding the interchange between interest groups and government personnel. Some have limited the right of former state officials to obtain contracts from the agencies for which they have worked during a specified period of time. Others have limited the right of former state officials to represent clients before their former agencies. However, states have been slow to limit elected public officials' ability to appoint lobbyists or campaign contributors to important positions in government.

Suspect Interest Group Practices Do campaign contributions buy sponsor-
ship of bills and special favors? The public and the press think they do. Public officials and lobbyists say they do not. Anecdotal evidence that contributions buy public policy is mixed, but enough cases have been identified to leave the casual observer with the perception that conflicts of interest do arise.
A practice that seems to be more than merely coincidental is the biennial ritual in Austin
after each election when special interest groups hold fundraising events to honor selected
legislators. State law forbids giving and accepting campaign contributions 30 days before the
start of a legislative session and throughout the session, causing a rush of fundraising activity
in the month after election day. Because these lobbyist-sponsored fundraising parties occur
after the election, not before, they are not simply an effort to help elect candidates who support
their group's cause they have already been elected. The reason, as one lobbyist said, is to
"pay the price of admission" or to obtain good access to legislators. These so-called late-train
contributions are commonly given to the winning candidates in the executive branch as well.
Losers are rarely the beneficiaries of such largess.
The Regulation of Lobbying
Fearing the influence of powerful organizations behind the scenes, reformers supported the creation of the Texas Ethics Commission with the power to enforce lobby and campaign finance reporting laws. Reformers believed that reporting requirements respect basic rights to freedom of expression while requiring that lobbyists' efforts be made public. The rationale for these laws is that the public should at least know who backs which policies and who stands to gain from them.
Lobbyist Reports Lobbyists for private interest groups, with few exceptions, must file reports with the Texas Ethics Commission if they are paid $1,760 per calendar quarter or if they spend more than $880 per quarter to communicate directly with any members of the legislative or executive branch to influence legislation or administrative action. Lobbyists must report:
⚫ Their actual clients
⚫ The general areas of their policy concerns
The range within which their compensation falls
• Their expenditures for advertisements, mass mailings, and other communications designed to support or oppose legislation or administrative actions
• Their expenditures on members of the state legislature or state employees in excess of $122.40 (60 percent of the legislative per diem) a day on food, drink, transportation, or lodging and $100 on gifts, which must be reported by name, date, place, and purpose
Campaign contributions are reported as we described in Chapter 4, but they are not clas- sified as lobbying expenses.
Evaluating Reporting Requirements Critics of the lobby reporting law
maintain that some provisions leave the public ill-informed because lobbyists' compensa-
tion and expenditures are reported in broad categories rather than in specific amounts.
Reporting which policy a lobbyist seeks to influence similarly requires only checking the
appropriate box on a form. For example, lobbyists may report contacting public officials
about "communications." Reformers charge that these requirements provide very little
information that the public can use. To be meaningful, lobby reports would need to list
the specific bill numbers on which lobbyists worked or the agency rule-making hearings at
which they testified.

though critics fault the Texas Ethics Commission
for not vigorously enforcing reporting requirements except in high-profile cases, it serves as a comprehen-sive repository of campaign financial statements, lists of registered lobbyists, campaign contributions, and cam-paign expenditures. One critic admitted the Texas Ethics Commission is “a pretty darn good library,” noting, how-ever, that it was at the same time “a pretty poor cop.”

The members of the Texas Legislature are provided a list of registered lobbyists and their clients by the first day in February of each legislative session, and the public may obtain copies of registration and activity reports from the Texas Ethics Commission website. By tabulat- ing and publicizing these reports, organizations like Texans for Public Justice, the National Institute on Money in Politics, and the Center for Public Integrity promote transparency in government and help keep the public informed about interest group influence in Texas.
Applying What You Have Learned about Interest Groups
LO 6.5 Apply what you have learned about interest groups.
You learned that various types of interest groups have formed, some focusing on economic issues, some pursuing noneconomic agendas, and some such as ethnic interest groups seek both economic goals alongside civil and political rights. Furthermore, you learned that orga- nized interest groups use tactics that range from direct contacts with state officials to plead their causes to attempts to shape the political environment through electioneering. So, we asked Jolt Initiative's Dr. Gloria Gonzales-Dholakia to provide you with a practical example of an interest group in operation.
In 2021, Dr. Gloria Gonzales-Dholakia was named the executive director of Jolt Initiative, the largest Latino progressive organization in Texas. Prior to joining Jolt she was the executive director of the Hanger Foundation as well as served as a school board trustee for the Leander Independent School District where she was the board's first elected Latina trustee. More recently, she has become the executive director of the Austin campus of the Jeremiah Program, a national nonprofit with one of the most successful strategies for disrupting generational poverty among single mothers and their children.
Politics in Practice
The Future of the Texas Electorate Is Latino
by Dr. Gloria Gonzales-Dholakia
Former Executive Director of Jolt Initiative
Texas' role in the history books of the United States is unique. It's the only state in the union that has been its own country, and for years, it's held an outsized influence in American pop culture and politics. Texas has been home to some of the most groundbreaking policies and political moments, from the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in Dallas to serving as the state where the landmark court case of Roe v. Wade was first heard. On Election Day, Texas' 40 electoral votes are the second biggest prize, following California; winning the presidency is much more challenging without the votes of the Lone Star State. From Black

cowboys to German pioneers, many ethnic groups have called Texas home and have had a hand in molding the Lone Star State, but there’s one group in particular who will be integral to shaping the future of Texas: young Latinos.
An estimated 205,000 young Latinos turn 18 each year, and by 2030, Latinos will be the majority ethnic group in Texas, thanks largely in part to the growing Latino electorate. In fact, currently one in three Texas voters is Latino. Yet it's Latinas in particular who are an especially powerful force for change and who hold the future of Texans in the palm of their hands. Jolt Initiative’s “We Are Texas” analysis found that Latina women ages 18 to 24 not only outpaced their Latino male counterparts by nearly 24 percent in their voter participation, but they are also the only age group to outpace their non-Latina female counterparts in voter turnout.
As the largest Latino civic engagement organization in Texas, Jolt Initiative has set out to ensure we engage and empower the young Latino electorate who is the future of Texas. Jolt Initiative is a nonpartisan organization focused on building a stronger democracy by increasing participation of young Latinos in Texas. Our efforts include non-partisan voter registration, where we train community members to conduct nonpartisan voter registration; leadership development, where we train young Latinos on public speaking, advocacy, and digital organizing and mobilization to help them be effective leaders for their community; and community organizing, helping young people form student chapters on high school and college campuses to organize around the issues that matter to them.
The impact of the Latino electorate is already being felt in elections. The 2018 midterm elections saw an almost 500 percent increase in voter turnout among young voters, and a 250 percent increase in voter turnout among the Texas Latino population during early voting. Two years later, the 2020 presidential election saw 500,000 first-time Latino voters in Texas alone. These numbers are a clear indication of the growing power of the Latino electorate in the Lone Star State, and as they begin making their presence known at the polls, they’re also fighting for the issues that are important to their families and communities.
Key among those issues is healthcare affordability, according to Jolt’s We Are Texas report. Twenty nine percent of Latinos in Texas are uninsured, according to the Texas Medical Association, and the healthcare divide amongst Latinos was only further exacerbated during the 2020 global COVID-19 pandemic, which disproportionately hit communities of color more severely. Beyond a lack of access to medical insurance, Latinos are among the millions of Texans who live in rural communities and who suffer from a lack of access to care, including hospitals and clinics. In fact, millions of Texans who live in rural areas do not have a hospital within a 60-mile radius.
Beyond healthcare, the country’s federal immigration policies have a significant impact on the Latino community. In Texas, one in six residents is an immigrant, while another one in six residents is a native-born U.S. citizen with at least one immigrant parent. The economic impact of immigrants also cannot be understated—immigrants in Texas contribute more than $8 billion in revenue for the state each year, pay over $20 billion in federal taxes, and spend over $89 billion in the United States. Immigrants are the lifeblood of Texas, and for Latinos in particular, passing comprehensive immigration reform is a key issue that must be addressed by our political leaders

The issue of climate change is also important to young Latinos, who recognize that our country’s reliance on oil and gas is causing irreparable damage to our climate and the health of our communities. Approximately 88 percent of our nation’s farm workers and 65 percent of construction workers were Latinos were in 2017, working in outdoor jobs that put them at high risk from extreme heat—which is only increasing as global temperatures continue to rise. In fact, farm and construction workers accounted for 70 percent of job-related heat deaths in Texas, and Hispanics also had three-fold more risk of dying from the heat on the job than non-Hispanics. Yet Texas also leads the rest of the country in wind and solar energy production and it has the capacity to power not just the Lone Star State, but the entire United States of America. For young Latinos, transitioning more of our energy production to clean, renewable energy is a priority that legislators must tackle, while also creating good-paying jobs in green energy and building a healthy and equitable economy.
Finally, student debt relief and access to higher education is an area of great interest and concern for the young Latino community. This decade, 70 percent more Latinos earned a college degree than in previous years, and the expectation is that the number will continue increasing. After all, 62 percent of jobs in Texas require some form of postsecondary education. However, two-thirds of prime working-age adults in Texas lack an associate’s degree or higher, leaving the state far behind other competitive large states in terms of educational attainment. For most young Texans, the biggest barrier to accessing higher education is the overwhelming burden of student debt that comes with a college degree. About 70 percent of Latinos in higher education come from low socioeconomic families, which means that Latino students are also more likely to drop out of school because of the high price of education than their white counterparts, according to a report by the American Council on Education. In fact, a study conducted by Southern Methodist University found that black and Hispanic students in Texas borrow $7,124 and $453 more than their white peers, on average. Financially independent students—those supporting themselves and paying their own way—borrow an average $7,660 more than their dependent peers.
These issues, which are core to the work of Jolt Initiative, are merely a sample of the issues that matter to young Latinos in Texas. However, they serve to provide insight into a growing group that is gaining political momentum, and whose voices and votes will increasingly shape the policies of the Lone Star State, and by extension, our country. It would behoove any politician, whether currently in office or seeking to make a run, to spend time listening to the young Latino electorate and learning about the issues that resonate with them. After all, the young Latino voters of today will be the majority of Texas before we know it.
Questions for Critical Thinking 1. What type of interest group is Jolt Initiative? Should it be classified as an economic, non-economic, or mixed group? What are its economic objectives? What are its noneconomic group-rights objectives?
2. What are the primary interest-group tactics that this group uses? Who are the principal targets of its mobilization and electioneering efforts

Chapter Summary
LO 6.1 Define interest groups and identify their major types. Interest groups are organizations of private citizens exercising their constitutional right to organize in an attempt to influence public policy. Economic interest groups seek to influence public policies that affect their pocketbooks, while noneconomic interest groups strive to realize their religious, political, or personal values. Some groups, like civil rights groups, work for the ideal of equality and financial self-interest as well.
LO 6.2 Describe how interest groups influence public policies in Texas. Interest groups adjust their strategies to maximize their potential influence on each major type of policy maker in Texas government. Their major tactics include lobbying, making campaign contributions, organizing public relations campaigns, and filing suit in the courts.
Interest groups have refined lobbying to an art form as they try to sway members of the legislative and executive branches to their policy positions. Like salespeople for their groups" ideas, lobbyists socialize with decision makers to build personal relationships, making them receptive to emotional appeals, ideological appeals, and persuasive information. Lobbyists conduct research and draft proposed bills for the legislative branch even as they monitor and shape the rule-making process in the executive branch.
Interest groups have also developed electioneering and public relations into a fine art. Campaign contributions give lobbyists access to elected officeholders, and organizing public demonstrations, letter-writing campaigns, and advertising campaigns can help create a political environment that makes public officials receptive to interest groups' appeals.
LO 6.3 Analyze the political balance of power among interest groups in Texas. Business interest groups, such as the Texas Association of Business, the energy and natural resources industries, utilities, and health-related businesses, are dominant in Texas. Socially conservative groups closely

aligned with state Republicans have considerable influence as well
Iron triangles dominate narrow public policy decisions, but once in a while, public policy battles over broad issues, such as taxation, abortion, education, or the environment, involve broader interest group alliances as more interest groups and individuals become active on a wider political battlefield.
LO 6.4 Evaluate the role of interest groups in Texas politics and policy formulation. The constitutions of the United States and Texas promote political expression and the right to organize to petition public officials. These rights recognize that representatives can represent their constituents' wishes only when citizens are able to communicate their policy positions effectively.
Interest groups play a positive role in the political system as they mobilize citizens and present their policy viewpoints to public officials. In a diverse, pluralistic state like Texas, no single group is able to dominate completely in a state that has divided and dispersed its institutional powers.
Critics charge that too few Texans have joined any interest
groups and because effective use of interest group tools
requires money, the most powerful interest groups are those
that represent narrow elites. Interest groups create conflicts
of interest by opening the revolving door, tempting officials with campaign contributions, and exploiting weak state institutions. Public interest groups and the media publicize reports on
interest group activity, but lobby reports to the Texas Ethics Commission do not reveal the specific policies on which lobbyists work or the implied understandings that come with campaign contributions.
LO 6.5 Apply what you have learned about interest
groups. You examined one interest group, Jolt Initiative, in depth from the practical perspective of its former executive director. You distinguished between its economic and noneconomic objectives and explored the interest-group tactics that it applies to achieve its goals.













