

Tex Texas has a republican form of government, which means that it is a representative democ- racy. A representative democracy is based on popular sovereignty, which gives ultimate governing authority to the people who elect officials to act on their behalf. It took many centuries of human struggle to achieve this enviable form of government in Texas and in the United States, but many of the world's people unfortunately still lack the opportunity for meaningful input in their political systems.
Texas government is structured on the principles of Jacksonian democracy. During the period when genuine democracy began to take root in the United States, between the 1820s and 1840s, belief in rule by the people became widespread. With it came the notion that the more officials who are elected, the more democratic the system is.
Thus, Texas has a very long ballot, and voters must inform themselves about the qualifica- tions of the large number of candidates who compete for nomination in the party primaries in the spring of even-numbered years. Then, in November, between 4,000 and 5,000 of these party nominees ask the voters to elect them in the general election to numerous county, state, and national offices. At other times during the year, many thousands more are elected in nonpartisan municipal and special district elections as well.
Texans have many opportunities to assert control over their government, and most Texans claim allegiance to democratic ideals, even if those principles have not been perfectly realized in practice. Historical voting restrictions have now been removed, but voter turnout in Texas still remains quite low compared to other states and other nations. Texans' traditional political culture does not put a premium on active citizen participation, and citizens are less likely to vote when one party's candidates are almost guaranteed to win all major state offices. Citizens on the margins of society rarely participate in political activities, just as they are less involved in other organized activities.
Our political system only represents those who actually participate-the rest of the people forfeit their influence. Meanwhile, low-information voters look to the media, activists, and political elites for cues to make their voting decisions. The Texas political system, therefore, gives disproportionate influence to those who do actively participate.
Political Participation
LO 4.1
Explain why voter turnout is low in Texas.
Voting in elections is the most basic and common form of political participation. Many people take part in other ways, such as discussing political issues with friends and co-workers, writing letters to local representatives or to newspapers, distributing campaign literature, contribut- ing money to a campaign, placing bumper stickers on cars, or via their activity on Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, and Twitter. Some people are members of interest groups such as neigh- borhood or trade associations; some serve on political party committees or act as delegates to conventions; and others participate in demonstrations or sit-ins.
The Participation Paradox and Why People Vote
Elections, of course, are the defining characteristic of representative democracies. It is through our votes that we hold elected officials accountable. After all, votes are what matter to politi- cians, at least those interested in winning and holding office. If we vote, we reward and punish elected officials for what they do while in office; therefore, politicians have an incentive to do what we want. If we do not vote, elected officials are largely free to do what they want. Clearly, voting is important in a representative democracy.
The problem is that a single individual's vote is rarely decisive because few elections are decided by a single vote. This may leave you wondering: Why do people vote? Among political scientists, this is known as the participation paradox. The point of this paradox is not to suggest that people should not vote, but rather to highlight that they vote for other reasons.

Who Votes?
Over the years, political scientists have learned quite a lot about why people go to the polls. It is now clear that a relatively small number of demographic and political variables are especially important.' The most important demographic variables are education, income, and age. The more education a person has, the more likely the person is to vote. Income is also a factor in voting; even among people with the same levels of education, those with higher incomes are more likely to vote. Age also matters. As people grow older, they are more likely to vote, at least until serious age-related health problems begin to set in. Why do these factors matter? The answer is straightforward: People who are educated, have high incomes, and are older are more likely to care about and pay attention to politics. Thus, they are more likely to vote.
In addition to demographic factors, certain political factors influence the likelihood of voting, especially one's expressed interest in politics and intensity of identification with a political party. The more a person is interested in politics, the more likely the person is to vote. The effect is fairly obvious, but nevertheless, quite


Who Votes?
Over the years, political scientists have learned quite a lot about why people go to the polls. It is now clear that a relatively small number of demographic and political variables are especially important.' The most important demographic variables are education, income, and age. The more education a person has, the more likely the person is to vote. Income is also a factor in voting; even among people with the same levels of education, those with higher incomes are more likely to vote. Age also matters. As people grow older, they are more likely to vote, at least until serious age-related health problems begin to set in. Why do these factors matter? The answer is straightforward: People who are educated, have high incomes, and are older are more likely to care about and pay attention to politics. Thus, they are more likely to vote.
In addition to demographic factors, certain political factors influence the likelihood of voting, especially one's expressed interest in politics and intensity of identification with a political party. The more a person is interested in politics, the more likely the person is to vote. The effect is fairly obvious, but nevertheless, quite

vote. The effect is fairly obvious, but nevertheless, quite important. Consider that a person who does not have a lot of education or income is still very likely to vote if he or she has a strong interest in politics.
Identification with either of the major political par-
ties also makes a person more likely to vote. This pattern
reflects the fact that people who strongly identify with a
political party, on average, care a lot more about who wins
than people who do not. In addition, the more a person
identifies with a party, the more likely it is that they will
be contacted by the party and its candidates during elec-
tion campaigns.

In one sense, deciding to vote is much like deciding to attend a sporting event, such as an MLB, MLS, NBA, WNBA, or NFL game. We do not go to a game to affect the outcome. We go for other reasons, because we like baseball, soccer, basketball, or football and care about it. The same is true for voting; education, income, age, interest, and party identification are important indicators of our desire to participate.
Of course, other factors are also important for explaining electoral participation, but the small set of demographic and political variables tells us quite a lot. With this information, we can pretty much determine whether a person will or will not vote in a particular election. We also can account for most of the differences in turnout among different groups, such as African Americans, Anglos, Asian Americans, and Latinos. This issue is picked up later in the chapter.
The Practice of Voting
The legal qualifications for voting in Texas are surprisingly few and simple. Anyone who is a citizen of the United States, at least 18 years of age, and a resident of the state is eligible to register and vote in Texas. The only citizens prohibited from voting are those who have been declared "mentally incompetent" in formal court proceedings and those currently serving a sentence, parole, or probation for a felony conviction.
Establishing residence for voting is no longer a mat- ter of living at a place for a specified time. Residence is defined primarily in terms of intent; that is, people's homes are where they intend them to be. Meeting age, citizenship, and residency qualifications does not mean
Did You Know? Up um allowed noncitizens to vote. Eve Vermont and several cities in Ma to vote in municipal elections.

that a person can simply walk into the voting booth on election day. Citizens must register in order to vote.
Voter Registration Texas law allows a citizen to register in person or by mail any time of the year up to 30 days before an election in which they wish to vote. The secretary of state makes registration applications available through voter registrar's offices, online, and at the Department
of Motor Vehicles website, and these must be mailed to the county registrar of voters.
Once they register, voters are automatically sent renewals at their address of record, but these renewals cannot be forwarded to new addresses. Thus, voters are permanently registered unless the post office returns their nonforwardable certificate to the voter registrar. Names on returned certificates are stricken from the list of eligible voters. Coroners' reports, lists of felony convictions, and adjudications of mental incompetence are also used to purge the voter registration list.
Occasionally, voter registrars may have failed to remove all deceased voters from the list and
this failure may have given rise to rumors of dead people voting, though there is little recent
evidence of ghosts actually casting ballots. Perhaps the greater controversy surrounding voter
registration lists is that anyone can purchase the computer-generated voter list for each county
in the state. Political parties and candidates make extensive use of voter lists when trying to
identify likely voters during election campaigns, but some voters have raised concerns that this
practice compromises their right to privacy and the right to a secret ballot.
Election-Day and Early Voting All Texas voters can now vote on or before election day. Some voters can vote by mail-specifically, those who plan to be away from the county during the entire early voting period and on election day, those who are sick or disabled, anyone who is age 65 or older, and people who are in jail but are otherwise eligible to vote. The rest can only vote early in person.
Generally, in-person early voting begins the 17th day before election day and ends the fourth day before election day. In addition to traditional election-day voting sites, such as schools, libraries, and fire stations, there are several other places to vote early, including grocery and convenience stores. This innovation has clearly made voting easier in Texas, and people are using it.
In 2022, 5.1 million voters voted early in person and 0.3 million by mail; together, these early votes represented 68 percent of all votes cast. Note that the tendency toward early voting may have important implications for when and how politicians campaign.
Voter Turnout in the United States and in Texas
Making registration and voting easier nationwide was expected to result in increased voter turnout the proportion of eligible Americans who actually vote. Such was not the case after 1960; turnout actually declined until at least 1996. This is not to say that the number of voters dropped. In fact, votes for the president increased 30 percent from 70.6 million votes in 1964 to 91.5 million votes in 1996; however, the number of voting-age Americans increased 70 percent from 114 million to 197 million during the same period. Thus, the voting-age population (VAP), the total number of persons in the United States 18 years of age or older, grew at a much faster rate than the actual voting population.

early voting
The practice of voting before election day. In Texas, early voting by mail is restricted, but any voter may cast a ballot in person at such places as schools, libraries, and community centers designated as polling places.
voter turnout
The proportion of eligible Americans who actually vote.
voting-age population (VAP)
The total number of persons in the United States who are 18 years of age or older


Did You Know? If we eligible population, excluding m felons and others who are inelig turnout was actually 66.8 perce
with it voter participation. More than one-third of all Americans, especially young people,
came to consider themselves independents-that is, unattached to either of the parties. As
noted earlier, these voters are less likely to vote than are partisans."
age from 21 to 18 in 1972. The amendment was passed at the height of the Vietnam War, with proponents arguing that a person who could be drafted and sent off to war should be able to vote. By extending the vote to 18- to 20-year-old citizens, the amendment expanded the eligi- ble voting population. As we have already seen, however, these young people are less likely to vote than are older persons-since they were given the right to vote, citizens in the 18- to 20-year-old age group have rarely posted turnout rates as high as 40 percent, even in presidential elections. Thus, adding the age group to the lists of eligible voters in 1972 slightly reduced the overall turnout rate. Second, identification with the two major political parties dropped after the 1960s, and
In this century, voter turnout has risen again as political conflict has intensified. Voters in the two major political parties have become polarized, taking widely different positions on major policy issues. And, although many Americans remain independent of the two major parties, most independents lean toward either the Democrats or Republicans and share many of their highly partisan views. The result is that the political environment has been dominated by passionate partisans who are more highly motivated to vote. It is this resurgence of parti- sanship that explains the more or less steady rebound in turnout since 1996, and especially the huge turnout in 2020.

Turnout in American general elections has historically been about 15 percent lower than it is in other countries that are ranked as among the most democratic in the world. Despite the extraordinary voter turnout in the U.S. 2020 election, Figure 4.2 shows that in these 32 other democracies, voter turnout is on average approximately 3 percent higher than in the United States. Median turnout among the these most democratic nations is 65 percent, rang- ing from a low of 36.1 percent in Switzerland to a high of 81.1 percent in Ghana. Many of those nations with higher voter turnout than the United States have made it easier to register to vote-in many, citizens are automatically registered to vote when they meet age requirements.
Figure 4.2 Voter Turnout Among the World's Most Democratic Nations
The United States is most similar to the United Kingdom and Portugal.

Reasons for Low Voter Turnout in Texas
Most Texans probably think that Texas is in the mainstream of American society. Why, then, is there such a difference between Texas and other urbanized and industrialized states in its political behavior? Why does Texas compare more closely with states of the Deep South in voter turnout? The answer may lie in its laws, socioeconomic characteristics, political struc- ture, party competition, and political culture.
Legal Constraints Traditionally, scholars interested in the variation in turnout across the American states have focused on laws regulating registration and voting. Clearly, the most important of these laws were the restrictions on who may vote, such as the poll tax, property ownership requirements, or the outright exclusion of African Americans and women.
Although these restrictions disappeared some time ago, other barriers to registration and voting persisted, and some remain in effect today. One can ask: Does a state promote political participation by setting the minimum necessary limitations and making it as convenient as possible for the citizen to vote? Or does a state repeatedly place barriers on the way to the polls, making the act of voting physically, financially, and psychologically as difficult as the local sense of propriety will allow? There is no doubt into which category Texas falls; historically, Texas has had and currently continues to have among the most restrictive voting laws in the nation.
However, nearly all of these restrictions have been changed by amendments to the U.S. Constitution, state and national laws, rulings by the U.S. Department of Justice, and judicial decisions. Even a cursory examination of these restrictions and the conditions under which they were removed makes one appreciate the extent to which Texas's elections were at one time closed. Consider these changes in Texas voting policies:
1. Poll tax. The payment of a poll tax as a prerequisite for voting was adopted in 1902. The cost was $1.75 ($1.50 plus $0.25 optional for the county) and represented more than a typical day's wages for some time. Many poor Texans were kept from voting. When the Twenty-Fourth Amendment was ratified in 1964, it voided the poll tax in national elec- tions. Texas and only one other state kept it for state elections until it was held unconsti- tutional in 1966 (United States v. Texas, 384 U.S. 155).
2. Women's suffrage. An attempt was made to end the denial of the ballot to women in 1917, but the effort failed by four votes in the Texas Legislature. Women were allowed to vote in the primaries of 1918, but not until ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920 did full suffrage come to women in Texas.
3. White primary. African Americans were barred from participating when the first party primary was held in 1906. When movement toward increased participation seemed likely, Texas made several moves to avoid U.S. Supreme Court rulings allowing African Americans to vote. Not until 1944 were the legislature's efforts to deny African Americans access to the primaries finally overturned (Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649).
4. Military vote. Until 1931, members of the National Guard were not permitted to vote. Members of the military began to enjoy the full rights of suffrage in Texas in 1965, when the U.S. Supreme Court voided the Texas constitutional exclusion (Carrington v. Rash, 380 U.S. 89).
5. Long residence requirement. The Texas residence requirement of one year in the state including six months in the county was modified slightly by the legislature to allow new residents to vote in the presidential part of the ballot, but not until a 1972 ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court were such requirements abolished (Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330).


How Does Texas Compare?
Voter Turnout in the State and Nation Table 4.1 shows that voter turnout in Texas has remained fairly stable at levels far below the national average. In the presidential election of 2020, for example, Texas turnout among the voting-age population (VAP) was 51.5 percent, about 10 percent below the rest of the nation. High numbers of noncitizens and incarceration explain some of the state's low voter turnout. Excluding noncitizens and felons serving their sentence (in prison or on probation), Texas's 2020 turnout rate among voting-eligible (VEP) citizens was higher, 60.4 percent, but only somewhat,
and still only surpassing Arkansas, Hawaii, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and West Virginia.
In midterm elections, Texas's turnout is consistently lower than in most other states (see Table 4.2). Its turnout rate rose above 30 percent in 2018 and 2022, but was still lower than most other states; in only six states did a smaller share of the voting age population turn out to vote in the most recent midterm election. The low turnout in midterm elections heightens the influence of those politically active people in Texas who consistently vote. Recall our earlier discussion of "who votes" and consider why Texas ranks lower than most states.
Table 4.1 Percentage of the Voting-Age Population Voting: Presidential General Elections,

6. Property ownership as a requirement for voting in bond elections. Texas held to this require- ment until the U.S. Supreme Court made property ownership unnecessary for revenue bond elections in 1969 (Kramer v. Union Free District No. 15, 395 U.S. 621) and for tax elections in 1969 (Cipriano v. City of Houma, 395 U.S. 701) and in 1975 (Hill v. Stone, 421 U.S. 289).
7. Annual registration. Even after the poll tax was voided, Texas continued to require voters to register every year until annual registration was prohibited by the federal courts in 1971 (Beare v. Smith, 321 F. Supp. 1100).
8. Early registration. Texas voters were required to meet registration requirements by January 31, earlier than the cutoff date for candidates' filings and more than nine months before the general election. This restriction was voided in 1971 (Beare v. Smith, 321 F. Supp. 1100).
9. Jury duty. Texas law provided that the names of prospective jurors must be drawn from the voting rolls. Some Texans did not like to serve on juries, and not register- ing to vote ensured against a jury summons. Counties now use Texas driver licenses and identification cards for jury lists.
Historically, Texas employed almost every technique available except the literacy test and the grandfather clauses to restrict the right to vote.
Hassle Factors Because of the actions of the U.S. Supreme Court and the adoption of the federal Voting Rights Acts, Texas no longer explicitly prohibits large categories of people from voting solely on account of their race or ethnicity. However, the state and local governments have adopted policies that have increased the hassle factor in voting, making it more expensive to vote in terms of time, money, and aggravation. (See the How Does Texas Compare? feature.) Some of these policies have been especially bur-
densome on low-income and minority voters. Since many of these are base voters for Democrats, they have charged that such policy changes amount to voter suppression; meanwhile, Republicans have supported these efforts as those to protect ballot integrity and prevent fraud. For example, the Republican legislature passed a strict voter photo-ID law requiring that vot- ers show forms of government ID that some students, minorities, and elderly voters were more likely to lack of
Did You Know? A Januar Houston Hobby School survey fou Texans and 77 percent of Texans u support legislation that would allo to register to vote online.
than other sectors of the population; only after a series of court cases challenging the law did the state relent to allow voters lacking a photo ID to present alternative forms ID when voting, as shown in Image 4.1. Similarly, Democrats have suspected voter suppression when polling stations have been closed in minority neighborhoods and near college campuses."
Demographic Factors Texas is known as the land of the "big rich" cattle barons and oil tycoons. What is not so well known is that Texas is also the land of the "big poor" and that over 4 million people live in poverty here. Although nationally, the proportion of people living below the poverty level in 2021 was 12.8 percent, in Texas, the proportion was 14.2 percent. Among African American and Latino Texans, 19 percent have incomes below this level.10 Formal educational achievement is also low. Of Texans older than 25 years of age, 16 percent have not graduated from high school. Among Latinos, more than one in four do not have a high school diploma."

How Does Texas Compare?
The Hassle Factor: The Ease of Voting in the 50 States
Figure 4.3 shows Texas has made it more difficult to register and vote than in 45 other states based on laws restricting voter registration, laws governing early and absentee voting, strictness of voter ID laws, and polling hours. Besides enacting a fairly strict Voter ID law, Texas has not taken the steps to facilitate voting that many other states have employed. For example, Texas is one of only eight states that do not allow online registration except when renewing drivers licenses; otherwise, it requires in-person registration or registration by mail. Texas has strictly limited voter registration drives by allowing only deputy registrars to
register voters in their county. In contrast, several states allow citizens to register to vote at the polling place on election day and some automatically register citizens when they have contact with the Department of Motor Vehicles unless they specifically request not to be registered.
Unlike Texas, 35 states allow "no excuse" voting by mail in which any citizen can obtain a mail ballot, not just those who are elderly, disabled or out of town on election day; in fact, eight of these states (California, Colorado, Hawaii, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, Vermont, and Washington) conduct elections entirely by mail and, in those states, mail-in ballots are automatically sent to all registered voters.

Given that income and education are such important determinants of electoral partici- pation, low voter turnout is exactly what we should expect in Texas. Because income and education levels are particularly low among Latinos, and to a lesser extent among African Americans, turn- out is particularly low for these groups. Voting by Texas Latinos is on the rise, however, and this has led to much greater represen- tation of Latinos in elected offices, as we will see. These trends should continue as income and educa- tion levels among Texas Latinos increase.
Political Structure Another
deterrent to voting in Texas is the length of the ballot and the num- ber of elections. Texas uses a long ballot that provides for the popular election of numerous public officers

(including many that some critics believe should be appointed). In an urban county, the ballot may call for the voter to choose from as many as 100 to 200 candidates vying for fifty or more offices. The frequency of referendums on constitutional amendments contributes to the length of the bal- lot in Texas. Voters are also asked to go to the polls for various municipal, school board, bond, and special-district elections. Government is far more fragmented in Texas than in other states, and the election of so many minor officials may be confusing and frustrating for voters.
Party Competition The competitiveness of elections is important to voters. The
closer the race, the greater the interest, attention, and participation during the campaign and on election day itself. The problem for Texas and other southern states is that general elections between the two parties often have not been competitive, and this has been true for a long time even when the party in power changed. In the past, Texas was a one-party

Democratic state, and this held until the late 1980s. Since the late 1990s, the Republicans have dominated statewide races. With rare exceptions, then, these races between candidates of the two parties in November elections in Texas have not been competitive. For example, in 2022, the Republican statewide candidates were victorious by margins of between 10 percent and 15 percent, and Democrat Beto O'Rourke lost to Republican Greg Abbott in the gubernatorial race by 11 percent. These sorts of lopsided election outcomes dampen voter interest and turnout.
Political Culture Insights into voter participation levels have been derived from the con- cept of political culture, which, as defined in Chapter 1, describes the set of political values and beliefs that are dominant in a society. Borrowed from social anthropologists, this concept has been found to be applicable to all political systems, from those of developing countries to modern industrial democracies. It has been especially useful in the study of American politics, where federalism has emphasized the diversity among regions, states, and communities-a diversity that cries out for some approach that can effectively explain it.
Important to students of electoral politics is that "the degree of political participation (i.e., voter turnout and suffrage regulations) is the most consistent indicator of political culture." It is clear that Texas political culture is one that has not valued political partici- pation as much as many states. Figure 4.3 shows states in the South, including Texas, have
Image 4.3 Although people are less likely to vote in the United States and especially in Texas, by comparison with people in other countries, they are more likely to take part in other ways such as communicating by social media and attending rallies and protests. Here, protesters rally at the state capitol against restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic.

a tradition of limiting African-American votes and continue to have the most restrictive election laws in the nation.
Types of Elections in Texas
LO 4.2 Describe the types of Texas elections.
Winning an office is typically a two-stage process. First, the candidate must win the Demo- cratic or Republican Party nomination in the primary election. Second, the candidate must win the general election against the other party's nominee. It is possible for a candidate to get on the general election ballot without winning a primary election (as will be discussed shortly), but this is rare. As in most other states, elections in Texas are dominated by the Democratic and Republican Parties.
Primary Elections
Three successive devices for selecting political party nominees have been used in the history of this country, each perceived as a cure for the ills of a previously corrupt, inefficient, or inadequate system. The first was the caucus, consisting of the elected political party members serving in the legislature. The "insider" politics of the caucus room motivated the reformers of the Jacksonian era to throw out "King Caucus" and to institute the party convention system by 1828. In this system, ordinary party members select delegates to a party convention, and these delegates then nominate the party's candidates for office and write a party platform. The convention system was hailed as a surefire method of ending party nominations by the legislative bosses. By 1890, the backroom politics of the convention halls again moved reformers to action, and the result was the direct primary, adopted by most states between 1890 and 1920. Texas's first direct primary was held in 1906, under the Terrell Election Law passed in 1903. The direct primary enables party members to participate directly in the selection of a candidate to represent them in the general election.
Traditionally regarded as private activities, primaries were at one time largely beyond the concern of legislatures and courts. Costs of party activities, including primaries, were covered by donations and by assessing each candidate who sought a party's nomination. Judges attempted to avoid suits between warring factions of the parties as much as they did those involving church squabbles over the division of church property. This was the basis on which the U.S. Supreme Court in 1935 upheld the Texas Democratic Party convention's decision barring African Americans from participating in the party primary." Because political party activities were increasingly circumscribed by law, the Court reversed itself in 1944 and recognized the primary as an integral part of the election process."
The Court noted that in a one-party state, which Texas was at the time, the party primary may be the only election in which any meaningful choice is possible. Because the Democratic Party seldom had any real opposition in the general election, winning the nomination was, for all practical purposes, winning the office. The party balance in Texas has changed quite a lot in recent decades as the Republicans have overtaken the Democrats and the GOP primary winner has not lost a statewide election since 1994.
Who Must Hold Primaries Any party receiving 20 percent of the gubernatorial vote in the prior election must hold a primary, and all other parties must use the convention system." Minor parties have the option of holding primaries if they received at least 2 percent of the total vote for governor in the last general election, but they usually choose to nominate
their candidates in conventions.16

Financing Primaries Party primaries are funded partly by modest candidate filing fees, but most of the cost of primaries is paid from the state treasury. The parties' state and county executive committees initially make the expenditures, but the secretary of state reim- burses each committee for the difference between the filing fees collected and the actual cost of the primary. To get on the party primary ballot, a candidate needs only to file an applica- tion with the state or county party chair and pay the prescribed fee. The categories of fees, applicable also for special elections, are summarized in Table 4.3.
So that no person is forced to bear an unreasonable expense when running for political office, the legislature provided that a petition may be submitted as an alternative to the filing fee. Such petition must bear the names of at least 5,000 voters for candidates seeking nomina- tion to statewide office. For district and lesser offices, the petition must bear the signatures of voters equal to 2 percent of the vote for the party's candidate for governor in the last election, up to a maximum of 500 required signatures.
Administering Primaries In the county primaries, the chair and county executive committee of each party receive applications and filing fees and hold drawings to determine the order of names on the ballot for both party and government offices. They then certify the ballot, choose an election judge for each voting precinct (usually the precinct chair), select the voting devices (paper ballots or voting machines), and arrange for polling places and printing. After the primary, the county chair and executive committee canvass the votes and certify the results to their respective state executive committees.
In the state primary, the state party chair and the state executive committee of each politi- cal party receive applications of candidates for state offices, conduct drawings to determine the order of names, certify the ballot to the county-level officials, and canvass the election returns after the primary.


The Majority Rule In Texas, as in most other southern states that were once predominantly Democratic, nominations are by a majority (50 percent plus one) of the popular vote. When several candidates seek their party's nomination, one candidate can come in first without necessarily getting more than half. If no candidate receives a majority. of votes cast for a particular office in the first primary, a runoff primary is required in which the two candidates receiving the greatest number of votes are pitted against each other. Outside the South, where the balance between the two major parties has historically been more equal, only a plurality of the votes (more votes than for anyone else) is usually required, and consequently no runoff is necessary. The election rule used may influence the number of candidates that run in primaries, as there is more reason to enter the race where the majority rule is used. That is, one does not need to expect to win the first primary, but just finish in the top two and get to the runoff (if the first-place candidate does not win more than 50 percent of the vote).
Primary elections in Texas are held on the first Tuesday in March of even-numbered years. The runoff primary is scheduled for the fourth Tuesday in May, or more than two months after the initial party primary election. Although there are earlier presidential primaries, no other state schedules primaries to nominate candidates for state offices so far in advance of the general election in November.
Turnout in Texas primaries is much lower than in general elections. Take 2022, for exam- ple: only 3 million Texans voted, approximately 14 percent of the more than 22 million people who were 18 years of age or older. The people who do vote in primary elections are hardly representative of the population-they tend to be older, better educated, more affluent, and more ideologically extreme.
Open Primary Party primaries are defined as either open or closed. These terms relate to whether or not participation is limited to party members. Because the purpose of a primary is to choose the party's nominee, it may seem logical to exclude anyone who is not a party member. However, not every state recognizes the strength of that logic. Texas and fourteen other states have an open primary, in which voters decide at the polls (on election day) in which primary they will participate. Of course, voters are forbidden to vote in more than one primary on election day, and once they have voted in the first primary, they cannot switch parties and participate in the runoff election or convention of any other party. Voters who did not vote in the first primary are still free to vote in either party's runoff primary, but because of the restriction against switching parties after voting in the first primary, some consider the runoff to be semi-open.
In contrast, the typical closed primary requires that a person specify a party preference when registering to vote. The party's name is then printed on the registration card at the time of issuance. Each voter may generally change party affiliation at any time up to 30 days before participating in a primary or a convention. Voters are limited, however, to the activities of the party they have formally declared as their preference. If the individual registers as an indepen- dent (no party preference), that person is excluded from the primaries and conventions of all parties in nine states. In nine others, unaffiliated voters are allowed to choose the primary in
which they would like to participate. Six states have partially closed systems that give parties the option of letting voters not affiliated with the party vote in the party's primary. Six states have partially open systems that allow voters to vote in any primary, but in doing so they often are registering as members of that party. Another three states use a top-two primary, in which candidates from differ- ent parties compete in a single primary and the top two vote-getters proceed to the general
election. Alaska uses a top-four primary, which operates in a similar manner to the top-two
primary, except that the top four voter getters proceed to the general election where ranked

runoff primary
A second primary election that pits the two top vote-getters from the first primary against each other when the winner of the first primary did not receive a majority.
open primary
A type of party primary in which a voter can choose on election day in which primary to participate.
closed primary
A type of primary in which a voter is required to specify a party preference when registering to vote.

choice voting is utilized. Finally, Nebraska employs a nonpartisan top-two primary for state legislative elections and a partially closed primary for other elections. Primary elections clearly differ quite a lot across states, but those differences have little bearing on the general election. Whether voters participate in a party primary or not, they are completely free to vote for any party candidate in the general election in November.
Crossover Voting The opportunity always exists in Texas for members of one political
party to invade the other party's primary. This is called crossover voting. It is designed to increase the chances that the nominee from the other party will be someone whose philosophy is like that of the invader's own party. For example, Democrats might cross over to vote for the more moderate candidate in the Republican primary, or Republicans might cross over into the Democratic primary to support the candidate who is least objectionable from their viewpoint.
Figure 4.4 Primaries and General Election Cycle in Texas
This figure shows the steps major party candidates must take to win office in Texas. In March and May of even-numbered years, major parties hold primaries among their members to determine who will be their nominees. General elections are public elections held in November so voters can determine who will actually win office among various party nominees and independent candidates.

1
Getting on the Primary Ballot
Candidates pay a filing fee or submit petition to their party's chair.
2
March Primary
Each party administers separate primaries to nominate candidates. Open to registered voters who choose to vote in that party's primary. Candidate must win a majority to be nominated or face runoff.
3
May Runoff Primary
Each party holds top-two runoff for candidates without majority in March primary.
Open to registered voters who did not vote in the other party's March primary. Candidate must win a majority to be nominated.
4
November General Election
Administered by state and county officials.
Held to determine which party nominee or independent candidate wins office.
Open to all registered voters.
Candidate must win a plurality to take office.
CTO
What is the difference between a plurality and a majority? Why do minor parties and independent candidates have such a difficult time getting on the ballot and winning the general election?

General Elections
The purpose of party primaries is to nominate the party's candidates. General elections, in contrast, are held to allow the voters to choose the people who will actually serve in national, state, and county offices from among the competing political party nominees and write-in candidates. General elections differ from primaries in at least two other important ways. First, because general elections are the official public elections to determine who will take office, they are administered completely by public (as opposed to party) officials of state and county govern- ments." Second, unlike Texas's primaries, in which a majority (50 percent plus one) of the vote is required, the general election is decided by a plurality vote, in which a winning candidate needs only to win the most votes, even if that number is less than 50 percent. Figure 4.4, above, shows the requirements for major party candidates to win office.
General elections in Texas are held every other year on the same day as national elections- the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years. In years divis- ible by four, we elect the president, vice president, all U.S. representatives, and one-third of the U.S. senators. In Texas, we elect all 150 members of the state house and roughly half (fifteen or sixteen) of the thirty-one senators. We also elect some board and court positions at the state level as well as about half of the county positions.
However, most major state executive positions (governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, and so forth) are not filled until the middle of the president's term. In the midterm elections, the U.S. representatives and one-third of U.S. senators (but not the president) again face the voters. All state representatives and half of the state senators are also elected in these years, as are some board members, judges, and county officers.
When the Texas Constitution was amended in 1972 to extend the terms (from two to four years) for the governor and other major executive officials, the elections for these offices were set for November of midterm election years so that candidates for these offices would not be running for office in presidential election years. This change was intended to separate presidential and state campaigns, insulate Texas public officials from the ebb and flow of presi- dential politics, and allow them to disassociate themselves from the national political parties. However, the political environment has now become highly nationalized and polarized and, as a result, political campaigns in Texas have instead come to be dominated by many national immigration, and gun control even in the midterm elections.
issues such as abortion, As was shown earlier, turnout in midterm elections has historically been much lower than in presidential election years, when many people are lured to the polls by the impor tance of the office and the visibility of the campaign. In midterm election years, marginal voters have been less likely to vote and voter turnout has declined noticeably. Figure 4.5 shows the levels of voter turnout in Texas's 2020 presidential election compared to the 2022 midterm state election.

Did You Know? There were twenty-three candidates (eleven Republicans, ten Democrats, one Libertarian, and one independent) in the May 1, 2021, special election in Texas's sixth Congressional District. The two candidates who advanced to the runoff (both Republicans) won 19.2 percent and 13.8 percent of the vote, with a Democrat placing third with 13.4 percent.
Special Elections
As the name implies, special elections are designed to meet special or emergency needs, such as ratification of constitu- tional amendments or filling vacant offices. Special elections are held to fill vacancies only in legislative bodies that have general (rather than limited) lawmaking power. Typical legis- lative bodies with general power are the U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives, the Texas House of Representatives and Senate, and city councils in home-rule cities. (All other vacancies, including judgeships and county commissioners, are filled by appointment.) Special elections fill vacancies only

until the end of the regular term or until the next general election, whichever comes first. The process of getting on the ballot is relatively easy and does not involve a primary. All that is required is filing the application form correctly and paying the designated filing fee and, as a result, multiple candidates including several from the same party may appear on the ballot. However, unlike general elections, winning a special election requires a majority of the votes, hence a runoff between the top two candidates frequently takes place. Between June 2019 and June 2023, eighteen Texas Legislature special elections (fourteen house and four senate) and three U.S. House special elections were held; that is approximately five special elections per year. Of these 21 special elections, almost half (ten) were decided in a second round runoff.
Figure 4.5 Proportion of Texans Voting in Midterm and Presidential Elections
This chart shows that only a small percentage of all Texans voted in the 2022 midterm primary and general elections that selected the governor and most major state executive officers. A little more than half of the population was registered to vote, and far less actually voted. Voter interest was higher in the 2020 presidential primaries and presidential election than in the 2022 midterm. Voter turnout in the 2020 presidential election represented 38 percent of the total population, whereas it represented only 27 percent in 2022.

The Conduct and Administration of Elections
LO 4.3 Understand how elections are administered in Texas.
Texas's secretary of state is the state's chief elections officer and interprets legislation and issues guidelines. The secretary of state has the responsibility of disbursing funds to the state and county executive committees to pay for the primary elections and is the keeper of election records, both party and governmental. The secretary of state also receives certificates of nomi- nation from parties that have conducted primaries and conventions and uses these certificates to prepare the ballot for statewide offices and tabulates statewide primary and general election results from county tallies.
County-Level Administration
Much of the process of managing elections is left to the counties, which may choose from three options for the administration of general elections. The first option is to maintain the highly decentralized system that the counties have used for decades. Under this system, the county clerk assembles the ballot, while the county tax assessor-collector processes voter registration and updates the voting rolls. The county commissioners' court draws precinct voting lines, appoints election judges, selects voting devices, canvasses votes, and authorizes payment of all election expenses from the county treasury.
The two other options available are designed to promote efficiency. One is for the county commissioners' court to transfer the voter registration function from the tax assessor-collec- tor's office to that of the county clerk, thus removing the assessor-collector from the electoral process. Most voters live in counties that have opted for a third, more centralized arrange- ment in which election-related functions of the county clerk and assessor are transferred to a county elections administrator, who manages most election functions and is appointed by the county elections commission. After the passage of a state law in 2023, Harris County became the only Texas county expressly forbidden to have a county elections administrator, ending the county's nearly three-year experience with one.
Ballot Construction
Texas once used the classic party column ballot, on which offices were listed in descending order of importance and candidates were listed in columns under the party label. To vote for all of the candidates of one party, the voter needed only mark the box for the party of his or her choice. Clearly, the party column ballot facilitates straight ticket voting, which is select- ing all of the candidates of one particular party. In order to pick and choose between the parties, a voter had to mark a separate box by each of the many candidates on the ballot.
Like so many other features of an election system, ballot construction reflects both practical
and political considerations. Texas began to move away from the strict party column ballot
to accommodate the requirements of electronic voting machines; today, most voters will see a
ballot on which candidates are listed underneath each office instead of in party columns (see
Figure 4.6). Beginning with the 2020 election, Texas eliminated the option that allows a vote
for all of a party's candidates by marking a single box, leaving only six states that continued
to provide their voters with a straight ticket voting option. Of course, voters may still cast a
straight-ticket vote, but they need to make a separate mark for each candidate they wish to
choose. And voters can still readily find their party's candidates because Republican candi-
dates are consistently listed in the first row under each office; Democrats come next, followed
by any third-party or independent candidates.
In most ways, the Texas ballot now resembles the office block ballot, also known as the
"Massachusetts ballot" because it originated there. However, unlike the Texas ballot, the office
block ballot lists the parties' candidates randomly rather than in a readily identifiable pattern.

county elections administrator
In many counties, the official appointed by the county elections commission to manage most election functions.
party column ballot
A type of ballot used in a general election in which all of the candidates from each party are listed in parallel columns under the party label.
straight ticket voting Selecting all of the
candidates of one
particular party.
office block ballot
A type of ballot used in a general election in which the names of the parties' candidates are listed randomly under each office.

Office block ballots make it harder to vote a straight party ticket, as voters must search for their party's candidates in each of the office blocks. Thus, they facilitate split ticket voting, selecting candidates from one party for some offices and candidates from another party for other offices. Minor parties and independent voters usually support the use of this ballot type because it makes straight ticket voting for the major parties more difficult and encourages voters to shop around among parties and candidates.
The Politics of Ballot Construction Understandably, supporters of the major Texas political parties strongly support the use of the party column ballot. It enables lesser- known candidates to ride on the coattails of the party label or a popular candidate running for a major office. There may also be an extra payoff in the use of this type of ballot when a party is listed first." For each office, the parties are slated from top to bottom on the ballot (see Figure 4.6) according to the proportion of votes that their party's candidate for governor received in the most recent gubernatorial election. Thus, candidates of the majority party (Republicans) benefit by occupying the coveted first line (or column) on the ballot. Democrats come second; next come third-party candidates and candidates of parties that were not on the ballot in the last election; and last come the independents.
Getting on the Ballot Whether a party nominee or an independent, a candidate must meet certain requirements to get a place on the general election ballot. Texas now makes it quite easy for political parties to get their candidates on the ballot. Any party that had one of its candidates receive at least 2 percent of the vote in any of the past five state- wide elections is placed on the ballot automatically. Thus, the Democratic and Republican parties have no problem getting their candidates on the ballot, and certification of primary winners is a mere formality. And, although some minor parties have had problems getting on the ballot in the past, both the Libertarian and Green parties now find it easier to qualify for automatic ballot access.
Minor parties without automatic ballot access and independent candidates must earn a place on the statewide ballot by petition. The petition they submit must include signatures of a number of registered voters who did not vote in that year's Democratic or Republican primaries equal to 1 percent of the total vote in the most recent election for governor (in 2024 and 2026, 81,030 signatures). For district and local offices the number of signatures required is much less daunting: 5 percent of the preceding gubernatorial vote or 500, which- ever is lower.20
Write-In Candidates Write-in candidates are not listed on the ballot-voters must
write them on the ballot. A write-in candidate must file a declaration of candidacy with the
secretary of state 70 days before election day. With the declaration, the candidate must include
either the filing fee or a nominating petition with the required number of signatures. The
names of write-in candidates must be posted at the election site. A candidate not properly
registered cannot win, regardless of the votes he or she receives. Even when registered, write-in
candidates are seldom successful.
Multilingualism All Texas ballots are printed in English and Spanish. Amendments
to the Voting Rights Act of 1965 require a political subdivision (typically, a county) to pro-
vide language assistance to voters if significant numbers of voting-age citizens are members
of a single language minority group and do not speak or understand English "well enough
to participate in the electoral process." Specifically, the legal requirement is triggered when
more than 5 percent of voting-age citizens or 10,000 of these citizens meet the criteria. As a

Figure 4.6 A Typical Texas Ballot from Fort Bend County in 2022
Recall that Republican candidates are listed first because their candidate received the most votes in the previous statewide election for governor. In Fort Bend County, as in all Texas counties, the ballot information is printed in English and Spanish.
GENERAL AND JOINT ELECTION ELECCION GENERAL Y CONJUNTA
Railroad Commissioner
Comisionado de Ferrocales
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno o uno:
Wayne Christian REP
State Representative, District 76
Representante Estatal Distrito Num. 76
Vote for none or one
Vota para ninguno a uno.
United States Representative, District 22
Representante de los Estados Unidos Distro Nm. 22
Bilingual ballot
Dan Mathews REP
Vote for none or one
Luke Warlord DEM
Suleman Latani DEM
Vote por Ninguno o Uno
Troy E. Nahis REP
Jaime Andres Diaz LIB
Chief Justice, 1st Court of Appeals
Juez President, Corte de Apelaciones
Jamie Kaye Jordan DEM
Hunter Wayne Crow GRN
Joseph LeBlanc LIB
Justice, Supreme Court, Place 3
Juez, Corte Suprema, Lugar Nom 3
Vote for none or one.
Vote para ninguno o und
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno o uno.
Terry Adams REP
Julie Courtis DEM
Debra Lehmann REP
Governor Gobernador
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno a uno.
Ted Wood IND
Em A Nowel DEM
Thomas Edward Oxford LIB
Greg Abbott REP
Beto O'Rourke DEM
Justice, Supreme Court, Place 5
Juez, Corte Suprema, Lugar Num. 5
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno o una
Rebeca Huddle REP
Justice, 1st Court of Appeals District, Place 4
usz, Conte de Apelaciones. Dato Nam. Lugar Num 4
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno o uno.
April Fams REP
Mark Tippets LIB
In races with a registered write-in candidate, write-in space is provided
Delish Barrios GRN
Lieutenant Governor
Mike Engelhart DEM
Amanda Reiche DEM
Justice, Supreme Court, Place Juez, Corte Suprema, Lugar Num. 9
Justice, 14th Court of Appeals District, Place 2 Avez, Cone de Apelaciones, Dato Num. 14
Lugar Num 2
Vote for none or one Vota para ninguno o una
Vote for none or one
Vote for none or one.
Vote para ninguno o uno.
Dan Patrick REP
Vote para ninguno o und
Evan Young REP
Kevin Jewell REP
Mike Coller DEM
Julia Maldonado DEM
Cheri C. Thomas DEM
Shanna Steele LIB
Candidates are listed in the order of their party's performance in the previous election for governor
Attorney General
Procurador General
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno a uno
Ken Paxton REP
000
Rochelle Mercedes Garza DEM
Judge, Court of Criminal Appeals, Place 5
Justice, 14th Court of Appeals District, Place uez, Corte de Apelaciones Disatto Num. 14
Jusz, Corte de Apelaciones Cminales, Lugar Num 5 Vote for none or one
Lugar Nam 9
Vote
para ninguno o una.
Vote for none or one. Vote para ninguno o uno
Scott Walker REP
Randy Wilson REF
Dana Human DEM
William Demand DEM
Judge, Court of Criminal Appeals, Place 6 Jusz, Corte de Apelaciones Ciminales Lugar Num 6
District Judge, 240th Judicial District Juez del Dinito, Distrito 240
Vole for none or one.
Voto para ninguno o una
Vote for none of one. Vote para ninguno o uno.
Jesse F. McClure, III REP
Edward M. Kranck REP
Robert Johnson DEM
Surendran K. Pattel DEM
Mark Ash LIB
Comptroller of Public Accounts
Contrator de Cuentas Publica
Vote for none or one
Vote para ninguno a uno
Glenn Hegar REP
Janet T. Dudding DEM
| V. Alonzo Echevarra-Garza LIB
* CTO What effect does a long and complicated ballot have on voter turnout in Texas? Does it affect wait times at the polls on election day?

result, the U.S. Department of Justice now requires Harris County, which includes Houston, and Tarrant County, which includes Fort Worth, to provide ballots, voting materials, and information in Vietnamese, with Harris County also required to provide ballots and voting materials in Mandarin Chinese. In some parts of the country, other languages are required, including Choctaw, Japanese, and Korean. In Los Angeles County alone, ballots are printed in thirteen different languages (Armenian, Chinese/Mandarin, Cambodian/Khmer, English, Farsi, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Russian, Spanish, Tagalog/Filipino, Thai, and Vietnamese).
The Secret Ballot and the Integrity of Elections
The essence of the right to vote is generally viewed as the right to cast a ballot in secret, have the election conducted fairly, and have the ballots counted correctly. The Australian ballot, adopted by Texas in 1892, allowed people to vote in secret. It includes names of the candidates of all political parties on a single ballot printed at the public's expense and available only at the voting place." Given a reasonably private area in which to mark the ballot, the voter was offered a secret ballot for the first time.


se
In addition to voter privacy, other aspects of election integrity must be considered. Election fraud obviously is important, as we want all legal ballots to count when we elect our representatives. Allegations often focus on voter fraud, which is when people vote despite being ineligi- ble. While claims of voter fraud are common, cases of it are not. While fraud does happen, it is not widespread; indeed, it is quite rare. This does not mean we should not care or that we should not monitor what voters do and investigate claims of wrong doing.
Of course, fraud also can be perpetrated by election
officials. Here, the concerns are with voter intimida-
tion, disenfranchisement, ballot-stuffing, invalidation
(or destruction) of ballots, and tampering with voting
machines. These and other techniques have been used
in the past and have been the subject of legislation and
law enforcement. They sometimes still do occur, but do

keep in mind that this is different from fraud committed by voters.
Texas has been vigilant in its effort to protect prevent fraud in the administration of elections. In addition to serious criminal penalties for election malfeasance, it has orga- nized election administration so political parties are able to serve as a check on each other.
Both parties have election officers present at all polling stations to assure fairness. County commissioners appoint the presiding judge in each precinct from a list nominated by the county chair of the party that received the most votes for governor in the last election and the alternate judges must be from the other party chair's list of nominees. Election judges must also appoint clerks representing both political parties, thereby assur ing that both parties have an official place at the polling station.
Moreover, county chairs of both parties as well as individual candidates may appoint poll watchers, who have the right to observe virtually every aspect of the election process except voters casting their ballots in the privacy of the voting booth.
Counting and Recounting Ballots We take for granted that when we vote, our votes count. As we learned in Florida in the 2000 presidential election, this is not true.

Did You Know? Australia pioneered the use of the secret ballot printed at public expense. Before it was introduced in the United States, votes were sometimes cast orally before cheering crowds or on paper ballots printed by political parties, often featuring only the names of their candidates.
Did You Know? Only 19 percent of likely voters believe voter fraud is a major problem in Texas."2


The first machine count of ballots in Florida showed George W. Bush with a 1,725-vote lead. In a mandatory machine recount of the same ballots, the same machines cut his lead to 327. We were also told that some 2 to 3 percent of the ballots were not counted at all. How could this happen? What does this mean? The answer is simple: Machines make mistakes. Some ballots are not counted. Some may even be counted for the wrong candidate. This shocked most Americans.
Did You Know? After a careful recount, the 2020 race for mayor of Dickinson, Texas, ended in an exact tie vote of 1,010 for each candidate. The two candidates each signed one of two ping-pong balls, one of which was drawn from a hat to decide the winner in 2021.
Experts have known for a long time that vote counting potentially contains some error. It is typically of little con- sequence for election outcomes, however. Counting errors tend to cancel out, meaning that no candidate gains a much greater number of votes. Thus, the errors are impor- tant only when elections are very close or within a half percentage point. This small margin of error is not very common, but it does happen on rare occasions.
Texas has fairly specific laws about recounts. A candidate can request a recount if a person loses by less than 10 percent. This is a fairly generous rule compared to other states. The candidate who requests the recount does have to pay for it, however, which means that most candidates do not request a recount unless the margin is much closer-say, one percentage point or less. As for the recount itself, the Texas Election Code states that "only one method may be used in the recount" and "a manual recount shall be conducted in preference to an electronic recount." The procedures are fairly detailed.


ters use touch screens to cast their ballots. See are used and how they are tested for accuracy at m/watch?v=h_KqlVmykWw.
Electronic Voting Partly in response to the events in Florida-and the seeming potential for similar problems in Texas-a number of counties introduced electronic voting in the 2002 midterm elections to allow voting by using touch screens. Instead of punching holes in ballots or filling in bubbles on scannable paper bal- lots, voters began to cast ballots by touching screens. The technology, similar to what is used in automated teller machines and electronic ticket check-ins at many airports, prom- ised an exact count of votes. It is now used for voting throughout much of Texas and the United States.
tom carter/Alamy Stock Photo
Although touch-screen voting has real benefits, there are issues with it as well. Consider that a small portion of the touch-screen voting machines used in Texas for the 2022 election still did not produce paper ballots. This is important because it is not pos sible without a paper trail to con- firm the vote totals those machines generate. Consider that paperless votes cannot be recounted by hand and voters have no receipts to verify that their votes were cast
-screen voting solve the problems with ts? How can we tell?

Election Campaigns in Texas: Strategies, Resources, and Results
LO 4.4
Identify the factors that advantage (or disadvantage) candidates in Texas elections.
The ultimate aim of party activity is to nominate candidates in the party primary or conven- tion and get them elected in the general election. The campaign for the party's nomination is often more critical in one-party areas of the state-Democrats in some large urban areas and Republicans in most rural and many suburban areas. For local and district offices in these areas, the key electoral decision is made in the primaries because the dominant party's nominee is almost certain to win the general election.
Candidates seeking their party's nomination in a primary pursue a different sort of cam- paign strategy than they do when they later run in the general election. The primary elector- ate is usually much smaller and made up of more committed partisans. As a result, primary candidates are likely to strike a more ideological or even strident approach that appeals to activists. Once they have won their primary, candidates will often moderate their views to win over swing voters and independents in the general election if they believe it will be competi- tive. For little-known candidates, money and the endorsement of party elites are more crucial in the primary than in the general election. Little-known candidates can frequently count on the party label to sweep them into office in general elections.
The General Election Campaign
To a large extent, general election outcomes are predictable. Despite all the media attention paid to the conventions, the debates, the advertising, and everything else involved in election campaigns, certain things powerfully structure the vote in national and state elections.24 In state elections, two factors dominate: party identification and incumbency.
First, where more people in a state identify with one political party than with the other, the candidates of the preferred party have an advantage in general elections. For instance, when most Texans identified with the Democratic Party, Democratic candidates dominated elected offices throughout the state. As Texans have become more Republican in their identification, Republican candidates have done very well; indeed, as was mentioned earlier, Republicans now hold every statewide elected office. Identification with the political parties varies quite a bit within Texas, however, and this has implications for state legislative elections. In some parts of the state, particularly in the major cities, more people identify with the Democratic Party, and Democratic candidates typically represent those areas in the state house and senate (see Chapter 7). Thus, party identification across the state and in individual legislative districts tells us a great deal about which candidates win general elections.
Second, incumbent candidates-those already in office who are up for reelection-are
more likely to win in general elections. This is particularly true in state legislative elections,
where the districts are fairly homogeneous and the campaigns are not very visible, but incum-
bency is also important in elections for statewide office. Incumbents have a number of advan-
tages over challengers, the most important of which is that they have won in the past. To
become an incumbent, a candidate has had to beat an incumbent or else win in an open elec-
tion, which usually involves a contest among a number of strong candidates. By definition,
therefore, incumbents are effective candidates. In addition, incumbents have the advantage of
office. They are in a position to do things for their constituents and thus increase their support
among voters and among prospective campaign donors.


Although party identification and incumbency are important in Texas elections, they are not the whole story. What they really tell us is the degree to which candidates are advantaged or disadvantaged as they embark on their campaigns. Other factors ultimately matter on election day.
Mobilizing Groups Groups play an important role in elections for any office. A fundamental part of campaigns is their get-out-the-vote (GOTV) efforts among groups that strongly support the candidate. To a large extent, candidates focus on groups aligned with the political parties." At the state level, business interests and teachers are particularly important. Republican candidates tend to focus their efforts on the former and Demo- cratic candidates on the latter. Candidates also mobilize other groups, including African Americans and Latinos. Traditionally, Democratic candidates have emphasized mobilizing these racial and ethnic minority groups. Mobilizing groups does not necessarily involve taking strong public stands on their behalf, especially those that are less mainstream. The mobilization of such groups often is through block walking, targeted mailings, digital ads, and phone calls.
Choosing Issues Issues are important in any campaign. In campaigns for state offices,
issues such as taxes, education, law enforcement, immigration, and culture are salient. Just as they target social groups, candidates focus on issues that reflect their party affiliations. They differ in both their attention to particular issues and their policy positions. Indeed, while politicians used to focus their appeals to the so-called median voter in their constituencies during general election campaigns, they now are more polarized. That is, candidates have begun to take positions to reflect the most passionate voters in their party base rather than the average voter. This is not to say that the people in the middle do not matter, just that they are less of a factor in determining candidates'
positions.


In choosing which issues to
campaign on candidates depend
heavily on public opinion polls.
Through polls, candidates
attempt to identify the issues that
the public considers to be impor-
tant and then focus on them,
sometimes putting forward their
own preferred policies and, in
other cases, crafting policies to
address those issues. The process
is ongoing, and candidates pay
attention to changes in opinion
and, perhaps most important, to
the public's response to the can-
didates' positions. Public opinion
polling is fundamental in modern
election campaigns in America,
and campaign messages are often
presented in advance to focus
groups-test groups of selected
citizens to help campaign strat-
egists tailor their messages in a
way that will appeal to particular
audiences.

The Campaign Trail Deciding where and how to campaign are critical in planning a campaign strategy. Candidates spend countless hours "on the stump," traveling around the state or district to speak before diverse groups. In a state as large as Texas, candidates for statewide office must pick and choose areas so as to maximize their exposure. Unfor- tunately for rural voters, this means that statewide candidates spend most of their time in urban and suburban areas, where they can get the attention of a large audience through the local media.
Nowadays, no candidate gets elected by stumping alone, and this has been true for some time. The most direct route to the voters is through the Internet and Texas's twenty mass media markets. Texas has approximately 200 local and cable television stations and 1,300 radio stations. In addition, around seventy-five daily newspapers and many more nondaily newspapers are dispersed throughout the state's 254 counties. Candidates hire public relations firms and media consultants, and advertising plays a big role even as the use of the Internet to campaign has increased dramatically. These days, a successful campaign often relies on negative campaigning, in which candidates attack opponents' issue positions or character. As one campaign consultant said, "Campaigns are about definition. Either you define yourself and your opponent or [the other candidates do].... Victory goes to the aggressor." Although often considered an unfortunate development in American politics, it is important to keep in mind that negative campaigning can serve to provide voters with information about the can- didates and their group associations and issue positions.
Timing The timing of the campaign effort can be very important. Unlike presidential elec- tions, campaigns for state offices, including the governorship, begin fairly late in the election cycle. Indeed, it is common to hear little from gubernatorial candidates until after Labor Day and from candidates for the legislature not until a month before the election.
In the past, candidates often reserved a large proportion of their campaign advertis- ing budget for a last-minute media "blitz." However, early voting has caused candidates to modify this strategy. Recall that in 2022, the vast majority of votes in Texas were cast early, during the weeks leading up to the election, which means that any final campaign blitz would have come too late to have any effect on most voters. As a result, political campaigns often begin their media blitz earlier, in the weeks preceding election day when early voting is taking place.
Money in Election Campaigns
Election campaigns are expensive, which means that candidates need to raise a lot of money to be competitive. Indeed, the amount of money a candidate raises can be a deciding factor in the campaign. Just how much a candidate needs depends on the level of the campaign and the competitiveness of the race. High-level campaigns for statewide office are usually multimillion-dollar affairs.
In recent years, the major statewide races for governor or U.S. senator have become espe-
cially expensive, and campaign spending has trended upward from one election to the next. In
the 2022 gubernatorial race, Republican Greg Abbott spent $141 million and Democrat Beto
O'Rourke spent $83 million, with an outside group supporting O'Rourke spending at least
$10 million on ads attacking Abbott. If we include the $24 million spent by the candidates
who unsuccessfully challenged Abbott in the March GOP primary, the price tag for the 2022
Texas gubernatorial election was more than $250 million.
Although lower-level races in Texas do not usually cost millions of dollars, they can be expensive as well. This is certainly true if a contested office is an open seat, where the incum- bent is not running for reelection, or if an incumbent is from a marginal district-one in which the incumbent won office with less than 55 percent of the vote. For example, in 2022,

he greatest state legislative down-ballot action was in the race for Senate District 27, which runs from the Rio Grande Valley to north of Corpus Christi, and for 33 years had been represented by the retiring Eddie Lucio, Jr. Democrat Mor-gan LaMantia spent over $6 million while between his own expenditures and those spent on his behalf, over $1 mil-lion was spent on Republican Adam Hinojosas campaign. LaMantia narrowly defeated Hinojosa by a 50.2 percent to 49.8 percent margin.

Where does this money come from? Candidates often try to solicit small individual contributions online and through direct mail campaigns. However, to raise the millions required for a high-level state race, they must solicit "big money" from wealthy friends or business and professional interests that have a stake in the outcome of the campaign; see some examples in the Texas Insiders feature. Another source of big money is loans-can- didates often borrow heavily from wealthy friends, or even themselves."
Banks, corporations, law firms, and professional associations, such as those representing doctors, real estate agents, or teachers, organize and register their political action committees (PACS) with the secretary of state's office. PACs serve as the vehicle through which interest groups collect money and then use it to support political campaigns. There also are super PACS, which in contrast to other PACs do not contribute directly to political parties or can- didates, but instead make their own separate, independent political expenditures. Contribu- tions to super PACs are not limited, and the only real restriction on the use of funds is that the super PACs cannot coordinate with parties or candidates.
Where Does the Money Go? In today's election campaigns, there are many ways to spend money. Digital advertising, direct mail, television ads, billboards, radio spots, yard signs, and phone banks are all campaign staples. Candidates for statewide and urban races must rely on media advertising, particularly television, to get the maximum exposure they need in the three- or four-month campaign period. Campaigns are professionalized, with candidates likely to hire consulting firms to manage their campaigns. Consultants contract with public opinion pollsters, arrange advertising, and organize direct mail and digital media campaigns that can target certain areas of the state.
We can get a sense of how candidates spend their funds by looking at one of the most high- profile political races in recent times. The 2022 Texas gubernatorial race between incumbent Republican Governor Greg Abbott and his Democratic rival, Beto O'Rourke, provides a case study of how modern Texas campaigns spend their money in statewide races. In 2022, Abbott spent $141 million, a little more than twice the $83 million amount raised by O'Rourke, which nevertheless constituted the third highest amount spent by a gubernatorial candidate in Texas history (behind only Abbott in 2022 and Democrat Tony Sanchez, who almost entirely self-funded his campaign, in 2002).
Abbott targeted more than two-thirds (68 percent) of his expenditures on political adver- tising, primarily television ads, but also digital and radio advertising. Abbott's next largest expenditure category was campaign staff salaries (10 percent) followed by consultants (9 per- cent). Abbott spent 8 percent of his campaign expenditures on fundraising, underscoring the need to spend money to make money, with three other line items constituting at least 1 percent of Abbott's overall expenditures: campaign office overhead (2 percent), public opinion polling (1 percent), and printing (1 percent).

Texas Insiders
Profiles of Texas Campaign Megadonors
Contributions to Texas state campaigns in 2022 totaled $558 million. Table 4.4 lists the fifteen largest individual and interest group campaign donors, indicating who contributed, how much they contributed, and in which kinds of public policy decisions they had an interest. The table excludes officeholder campaign accounts, political parties, party-affiliated groups, political action committees, and other institutional donors, since these groups are funded by individuals and act as pass-through entities that receive their money from other individuals and interest groups.
Thinking about the Role of Elites in Texas Politics
Some critics have worried that large contributions buy outsized political influence for their donors. Most observers agree that campaign contributions open doors, giving
contributors access to public officials to argue the case for their interests; some critics argue that candidates' reliance on large campaign contributions corrupts state politics and skews public policy toward the interests of wealthier individuals and groups.
Others argue that candidates who spend the most money do not always win because the influence of large contributions can be balanced by other influences, such as small contributions, grassroots activism, and public opinion. They defend the donors' right to give money to candidates who share their viewpoints as a form of expression essential to a free society.
*PRO
Texas campaign finance regulations are designed to hold public officials and campaign contributors accountable by shining the light of publicity on them. Think of other ways to limit potential corrupting influences that do not interfere with freedom of expression.

While O'Rourke's highest expenditure line item was also political advertising, with a greater mixture of digital advertising along with television ads, it only accounted for 42 percent of his total expenditures, compared to 68 percent for Abbott. O'Rourke's next largest expenditure category was consultants (17 percent), followed by campaign staff salaries (14 percent), fund- raising (11 percent), printing (5 percent), public opinion polling (2 percent), campaign office overhead (1 percent), and events/travel (1 percent). Unlike the case for Abbott's campaign, where political donations to other campaigns or groups accounted for less than one-half of one percent of his expenditures, one out of every twenty dollars the O'Rourke campaign spent (5 percent) was a donation to a campaign or group. The amounts given ranged from highs of $2,546,000 to the Texas Democratic Party, $279,015 to the Texas Organizing Project, and $251,500 to the Dallas County Democratic Party to lows of between $120 and $200 to approximately fifty different churches.
Clearly, money is important in election campaigns. Although the candidate who spends the most money does not always win, a certain amount of money is necessary for a candidate to be competitive.
For candidates running for state-level offices, the most important provisions of Texas law regarding money in campaigns are as follows:
 Candidates may not raise or spend money until an official campaign treasurer is appointed.
 Candidates and PACs may not accept cash contributions for more than an aggregate of
$100, but checks and in-kind donations in unlimited amounts are permitted.  Corporations and labor unions are prohibited from making direct contributions to candidates.
 Candidates and treasurers of campaign committees are periodically required to file sworn statements listing all contributions and expenditures.
 Both criminal and civil penalties are imposed on anyone who violates the law's provisions.
 The Texas Ethics Commission enforces campaign finance regulations by imposing fines, but it rarely refers violators for criminal prosecution and is seen as largely toothless by many politicians.
Raising and spending money on Texas campaigns still is pretty much wide open. For example, corporations and labor unions may not give directly to a candidate, but they may give via their PACs and make independent expenditures that benefit candidates or parties. Note also that there are no limits on the amount an individual may contribute or how much a candidate may spend. Probably the most important effect of the campaign finance law in Texas comes from the requirement of disclosure. How much money a candidate raises, who makes contributions, and how campaign funds are spent are matters of public record at the Texas Ethics Commission website. This information may be newsworthy to reporters or other individuals motivated to inform the public. Rather than attempting to limit the amount of campaign contributions and expenditures, Texas law relies on public
disclosure to expose any conflicts of interest that may result from candidates' reliance on
large contributions from individuals and PACs. The only significant limits on the size of
campaign contributions are those made to judicial candidates, which will be discussed in
Chapter 9.


Who Gets Elected
It is useful to think of elected offices in Texas as a pyramid. At the bottom of the pyramid are most local offices; at the top is the governor. Moving from bottom to top, the importance of the office increases and the number of officeholders decreases. It thus gets more and more difficult for politicians to ascend the pyramid, and only the most effective politicians rise to the top. This tells us a lot about candidates and elections in Texas and elsewhere. In local elections, the pool of candidates is diverse in many ways, including educational
background, income, and profession. As we move up the pyramid, however, candidates become much more homogeneous. For statewide office, the typical candidate is middle or upper class, from an urban area, and has strong ties to business and professional interests in the state. Most elected state officers in Texas, including the governor, lieutenant governor, and attorney general, must be acceptable to the states major financial and corporate interests and to its top law firms. These interests help statewide candidates raise the large amounts of money that are critical to a successful race. Successful candidates for statewide office in Texas have traditionally been Anglo males.
Prior to 1986, when Raul Gonzalez was elected to the state supreme court, no Latino or African American had been elected to statewide office. In 1982, Ann Richards was elected state treasurer, becoming the second woman ever to be elected to statewide office in Texas. She had been preceded by Miriam Ma Ferguson who was elected governor in 1924, and then again in 1932, as a surrogate for her husband, Jim Pa Ferguson, who had been impeached and was prohibited from holding public office in Texas. Since then, women and minorities have made some gains in statewide offices. Ann
Richards became the first woman elected governor in her own right in 1990. Kay Bailey Hutchison captured the state treasurers office and in 1993 won a special election to become the first woman from Texas elected to the U.S. Senate. Dan Morales was the first Latino to win a state executive office when he captured the attorney generals office in 1990. More history was made when Morris Overstreet of Amarillo won a seat on the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals in 1990 and became the first African American elected to a statewide office. Women and ethnic and racial minorities have been making inroads in other elected
offices in Texas. Women held 30 percent of the seats in the 88th Legislature (202324), and women have at least once held the post of mayor in the states six largest cities: Hous-ton, Dallas, San Antonio, Austin, Fort Worth, and El Paso. Latinos held 24 percent of the seats in the state legislature, African Americans occupied 10 percent and Asian Ameri-cans held 3 percent. Clearly, Texas politics has changed a lot over time. These changes are beginning to reflect the changing composition of the Texas electorate, though with a noticeable la

Applying What You Have Learned about Voting and Elections in Texas LO 4.5 Apply what you have learned about voting and elections in Texas.
You learned that the primary goal of political campaigns is to select issues and mobilize groups in support of their candidates. Political consultants of both political parties have targeted their

rts toward the growing population of Latinos in Texas. Although Democrats have usu-ally had more success in mobilizing this group, Republicans made surprising inroads among Latinos in South Texas in the 2020 and 2022 elections. So, we asked Luke Macias to explain the Republican strategy. Luke Macias founded Macias Strategies in 2011 at the age of 21. In 2012 he served as the
consultant for five movement conservative Texas House candidates competing in the Repub-lican primary, three of whom were victorious. In 2014, Capitol Inside named Macias the 2014 primary election cycles Most Valuable Consultant. Macias continues to be one of the most sought-after campaign consultants by conservative Republican candidates


Politics in Practice
Donald Trump Changed Orthodox Views on Hispanics
by Luke Macias
Founder and Principal, Macias Strategies
For as long as I have been engaged in politics there has been an established perspective as to how Republicans could gain a larger share of Hispanic voters, and why Democrats enjoy the majority share of the Hispanic vote each election cycle.
The long-held viewpoint has been that Hispanic Texans tend to culturally align more with Republicans while desiring the softer approach on immigration and government programs that embody the Democrat Party.
This permeated the past establishment GOP perspectives. George W. Bush not only championed this approach but in 2021 called Trump's version of politics "nativist". Rick Perry famously defended his program to pay for college for illegal immigrants as "compassionate" and John Cornyn immediately following the election of Joe Biden began talks with Democrats to give more illegal immigrants legal status in our nation.
Greg Abbott has quietly attempted to kill efforts to end taxpayer funded programs for illegal immigrants in an effort to court Hispanic voters. Many Republicans have been so filled with fear that Hispanic voters might view them as anti-immigrant that they have quietly gone along with either soft amnesty pushes or funded government benefits to those here illegally.
Then, in walked Donald Trump. The number one thing he was known for was literally pushing a physical border wall, and he constantly talked about the problems of the open southern border. The media cast him as a hateful man who stuck kids in cages at the border, and also highlighted anything disparaging he said regarding a Hispanic person in an effort to convince Hispanics that Trump was wrong on illegal immigration and, therefore, wrong for them.
So how did Donald Trump gain a larger portion of the Hispanic vote in 2020 than any recent Republican presidential candidate? And what does that tell us about the past orthodoxy that has permeated the Republican Party of Texas?
Well, if you are John Cornyn, George W. Bush, or Greg Abbott, it tells you nothing. Because they are blind to their own failures. But for many in the GOP it has caused serious reflection.
The Republican vote share in the Rio Grande Valley was 30 percent in 2012, 29 percent in 2016, 32 percent in 2018 and 42 percent in 2020. This shift is more than a little notable.

Zapata County has stuck out the most as one that literally flipped. Hillary won 66 percent in this majority Hispanic county in 2016, and Trump got 53 percent in 2020.
I think there are three contributing factors that have to be considered. You have the fact that immigration enforcement is actually a winning issue, the bread-and-butter support of a Republican willing to spend a lot of money on direct payments to Americans, and the wokeness of the left.
Immigration: The Democrat party and the media were both obsessed with Trumps border policies. They spent a substantial amount of time trying to convince America, and the Hispanic population of Texas that his obsession with the border was tied to an actual problem he had with Hispanics. You would think that with such an emphasis on this issue, you would at least see Trumps support flatline amongst Hispanics, but instead it increased. Its very hard for Democrats to admit this, but in nearly every poll Ive seen, Hispanics in Texas actually believe in a secure border, and do not equate themselves with illegal immigrants. They do differentiate between legal and illegal immigration, and they seem to actually believe that the border needs to be secured. Financial support: At the end of the day, the fact that Trump was less loyal to the traditional GOP orthodoxy of less spending probably helped him with the Hispanic community. This voting block generally works very hard and are less dependent on government handouts. However, many of these families were affected by COVID and getting direct payments from the federal government most definitely made an impact on their lives and likely made Trump seem much more supportive of them in a way that mattered. As a fiscal conservative, this one is hard for me to admit, but I think its true.
Wokeness: Hispanics are not woke in the sense that Hollywood and coastal elites would like. They simply dont culturally align with a more socialist agenda. They dont support cancel culture, and the issues that affect their everyday lives have nothing to do with the cultural revolution that is being waged by east and west coast elites. While Trump clearly had a unique appeal to these voters, it seems hard to refute the fact that Democrats pushed them away a little as well.
In conclusion, these shifts matter for Texas, and over the next decade, we will witness a battle in the GOP regarding how we actually try to win over Hispanic voters. I for one believe that Trump gave us a pretty clear roadmap. Whether we are smart enough to take it is yet to be determined.
Questions for Critical Thinking 1. How were Republicans able to mobilize significant support among Texas Latinos? Which issues does the author believe will draw them toward the Republican Party? 2. How will Republican campaign strategy impact the trajectory of Texas politics

 Chapter Summary
LO 4.1 Explain why voter turnout is low in Texas. Before you can vote in Texas, you must first register. Once registered, voting in Texas is easy, though Texas remains one of only a handful of states that do not permit online voter registration.
National turnout has fluctuated between 49 and 62 percent in presidential elections and hovered around 40 percent in most midterm elections, lower rates than we find in most other advanced democracies. Voter turnout
in Texas is usually about 10 percent below the national average.
Low voter turnout in Texas may be due in part to the state's socioeconomic characteristics. A comparatively large percentage of Texans live below the poverty level, and many have not graduated from high school; these people are not very likely to vote. The history of restrictive voting laws and the lack of party competition also account for low turnout in the state.


LO 4.2 Describe the types of Texas elections. In Texas, as in most American states, winning elected office usually requires candidates to win both a primary and a general election. Party primaries are used to select the parties' nominees. In Texas, candidates must win the primary by a majority vote or face a runoff primary between the two highest vote-getters.
The election that officially determines who will take office is the general election, in which all party nominees and independent candidates face off against each other. Whichever candidate gets the most votes, the plurality, wins. Except for special elections, the candidate does not need a majority to be victorious.
LO 4.3 Understand how elections are administered in Texas. Although the Texas secretary of state is the chief elections officer for the state, the actual administration of elections is largely decentralized among county officials.
Getting on the general election ballot is difficult for independent candidates, but most political party nominees have fairly easy ballot access. However, major party nominees must first win their party primary, which may not be quite so easy.
Ballot design is an important factor in elections. Texas traditionally has used a variation of the party column ballot, in which the names of all the candidates of each party are listed under each office in the order of their party's performance in the previous election for governor. This means that Republicans are

consistently given the coveted first position for each office on the general election ballot
While there have been a very few instances of election fraud in Texas, the state's elections have been carried out with integrity. and considerable care is taken in counting and recounting ballots.
LO 4.4 Identify the factors that advantage (or disadvantage) candidates in Texas elections. In Texas, as in other states, voters' choices on election day are driven to a large extent by party affiliation, and Republican candidates usually win statewide office. Democrats, though, have large pockets of supporters in some areas, particularly the big cities-Austin, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio-as well as the Rio Grande Valley.
Aside from the partisan balance, incumbency is also important, and candidates need to be able to campaign effectively by mobilizing groups and choosing attractive issue positions. Candidates must raise an increasing amount of money to be competitive.
LO 4.5 Apply what you have learned about voting and elections in Texas. You learned that campaign strategists' main goal is to select issues and mobilize voters to support their candidates. You learned how at least one Republican strategist analyzes his party's potential to gain support among Latinos, one of the fastest-growing and politically significant groups that will determine the future of Texas elections.





























