
The Founders created our complicated system of federal government and provided for the election of a president and Congress. However, the U.S. Constitution makes no mention of political parties. The Founders actually held negative attitudes toward parties. George Washing- ton warned of the "baneful effects of the spirit of party" in his farewell address. James Madison, in Federalist Paper 10, criticized parties or "factions" as divisive, but he admitted that they were inevitable. Madison and others at the time thought that parties would encourage conflict and undermine consensus on public policy. Yet, despite their condemnation of parties, these early American politicians engaged in partisan politics and initiated a competitive two-party system. Parties, then, are apparently something we should live neither with nor without. They have been with us from the start of this country and will be with us for the foreseeable future, influ- encing our government and public policy. It is important, therefore, to gain an understanding of what they are all about.
What is a political party? This question conjures up various stereotypes: smoke-filled back rooms of the past where party leaders or bosses make important behind-the-scenes decisions; activists or regulars who give time, money, and enthusiastic support to their candidates; or voters who proudly identify themselves as Democrats or Republicans. Essentially, though, a political party is a broad-based coalition of people whose primary purpose is to win elections. Gaining control of government through popular elections is the most important goal for political parties, and most of the activities parties pursue are directed toward this purpose. Parties recruit and nominate their members for public office. They form coalitions of different groups and interests to build majorities so that they can elect their candidates.
Political parties are vital to democracy in that they provide a link between the people and the government. Parties provide an avenue for the ordinary citizen to participate in the political system; they provide the means for organizing support for particular candidates. In organizing this support, parties unify various groups and interests and mobilize them behind the candidates who support their preferred positions.
Characteristics of American Political Parties
LO 5.1 Identify the characteristics of American political parties.
The American political party system has three distinct characteristics not always found in party systems elsewhere in the world: (1) a two-party system, (2) pragmatism, and (3) decentralization.
Two-Party System
In Texas and the other states, political competition is usually between the two major par- ties-the Democrats and the Republicans. Such a system is called a two-party system because only two dominant parties compete for political office and minor or third parties have little chance of winning.
The two-party system partly results from our electoral system, which relies on single-member
districts-election districts in which one candidate is elected to a legislative body. If only one
representative can be elected in a district, voters tend to cast their ballots for the major party
candidates that have the best chance of winning and not "waste" their vote on a third party
destined to lose. Employing a plurality voting rule in general elections, as we noted in Chapter 4,
only reinforces the dominance of a two-party system because there is no electoral reason to run
as a third-party candidate or support one unless the party actually has a realistic chance to win.
By contrast, under a majority voting rule, which is used in Texas primary and special elections,
there may be a benefit to finishing second because it can lead to a runoff election between the top
two candidates if the plurality winner in the first election does not get a majority of the votes.'
In addition to the electoral system, laws put in place by the Democratic and Republican par-
ties make it hard for third parties to form, and major parties manipulate election laws to their

own advantage. In 2019, for example, the Republican majority in the Texas Legislature made ballot access a little easier for third parties in the hope that allowing the Green Party onto the ballot would hurt Democrats in the 2020 election. Under this legislation, a party's candidates are automatically placed on the ballot if any one of its statewide candidates wins at least 2 percent of the vote in any one of the last five previous general elections (the Green Party had met this requirement in 2016, hence insuring the party ballot access through at least 2024). However, the same law also added the requirement that minor-party candidates, who are nominated by conventions (instead of primaries), are required to pay filing fees or file petitions as well. Some observers argue that this new requirement was designed to make it harder for Libertarian candi- dates, support for which is more likely to come at the expense of Republicans.
Otherwise, independent candidates and third parties without automatic ballot access can get on the ballot only by launching petition drives that gather the signatures of registered voters who did not vote in either major party primary. For a statewide office in Texas, the petition must include a number of valid signatures equal to 1 percent of the total vote in the previous election for governor. In 2024 and 2026, 81,030 valid signatures will be required for any new party to gain statewide ballot access. This is a formidable requirement that discour ages formation of new political parties.
Despite the electoral system and election laws, there have been third parties in the United States and in Texas. Most have come and gone, partly because of the difficulties of competing, but also because of the major parties' efforts to absorb third parties by adopting their issues. One notable example is the Populist Party of the 1890s, which was absorbed by the Democratic Party. Only rarely have new parties survived, and only once did a new party replace a preex- isting party; during the 1850s the Republican Party emerged after the collapse of the Whig Party. Since then, there have been many attempts to form third parties, yet the Democratic and Republican parties remain dominant and the two-party system remains largely unchallenged.
Pragmatism and Ideology
Pragmatism in politics means that ideas should be judged on the basis of their practical results rather than the purity of their principles. In other words, a pragmatist is interested in what works. Because of the two-party system, American parties need to appeal to a majority of voters in order to gain public office. Thus, they have been willing to bargain with a fairly wide range of organized groups and take stands that appeal to a large number of interests. As such, American parties historically have been less programmatic than those in many European coun- tries that have multi-party systems, where parties are more likely to be committed to a particu- lar narrow ideology and their supporters committed to specific programmatic goals. This has begun to change over the past 30 years, however, as American parties have become increasingly programmatic, and party positions are now much more divergent on many salient policy areas.
Pragmatism often means focusing on those issues on which virtually all of the public agrees, what political scientists often refer to as valence issues. Leading examples are peace and prosperity, which
feature prominently in American elections, especially the economy. This may have been made clear- est by former President Bill Clinton's political strategist James Carville, who famously focused their successful 1992 campaign on the phrase "It's the Economy, Stupid." There were signs of this in the
2020 presidential election as well, where Donald Trump heralded economic conditions prior to COVID-19 and the benefits of opening the economy during the pandemic. Joe Biden, by contrast, highlighted the economic troubles that Americans were facing during the election year. Almost every campaign consultant has repeated the same advice again and again in state and local campaigns because economic growth is, after all, one of the few policies which almost every voter supports.
While candidates may prefer to emphasize valence issues and avoid taking clear stands on
controversial issues that may alienate potential supporters in a general election, they increas- ingly have little choice. In large part because of the demands of partisans, candidates in U.S. elections, including those in Texas, find themselves emphasizing position issues, on which the


public is divided, instead of valence issues. They also stress leadership potential and statesman- ship, as well as family life and personality, but position issues are important and prominent in both primary and general elections.
Growing Polarization Although the broad electoral coalitions that comprise Ameri- can parties make it difficult for them to achieve ideological consistency, it would be a mistake to assume that parties in America do not differ from one another. Indeed, most observers think that American parties have become more programmatic and more polarized in recent years. While individual candidates occasionally deviate from their party's agenda, the Republican Party has become the party of conservatives and the Democratic Party the party of liberals. These ideological differences are readily apparent and growing wider. This growing gap between liber- als and conservatives is known as polarization. Voters who participated in the presidential election of 2020 could easily see a sharp contrast between the populist conservatism of Donald Trump and the more liberal philosophy of his opponent, Joe Biden. Similar intense philosophi cal differences also were evident between the parties' candidates for Texas state offices in the 2022 election in which highly divisive issues such as abortion, immigration, and gun control dominated state campaigns. In Chapter 7, we describe how the Texas Legislature has also become increasingly polarized along partisan lines over the past 30 years.
Conservatives The meaning of conservatism changes over time, and it means different things to different people; some people are economic conservatives while others are social con- servatives. As we saw in Chapter 1, economic conservatives believe that individuals should be left alone to compete in a free market unfettered by government control; they prefer that govern- ment regulation of the economy be kept to a minimum. They extol the virtues of individualism, independence, and personal initiative. However, conservatives often support government involve- ment and funding to promote business, including construction of highways, tax incentives for investment, and other government assistance to business. The theory is that this assistance will encourage economic development and hence prosperity for the whole society; critics call this the


"trickle-down theory." On the other hand, conservatives are likely to oppose government programs that involve a large-scale redistribution of income or wealth, such as public assistance for low-income families, universal health care coverage, and a universal basic income.
Some social conservatives view change suspiciously; they tend to favor the status quo-things as they are now and as they have been. They emphasize traditional cultural norms and often favor vigorous government action to pre- serve what they see as the proper moral values of society. Because conservatives hold a more skeptical view of cultural change than liberals do, they are more likely to perceive abortion, immigration, LGBTQ rights, and marijuana legalization as threats to traditional or religious values. Conservatives are also more likely to favor stiffer penalties for criminals, including capital punishment. Conservatives may combine support for the free market with support for traditional values, but some are driven primarily by eco- nomic conservatism while others focus on cultural issues.
Like conservatism, libertarianism is based on a limited government philosophy that rejects government involve- ment in the economy and is, hence, conservative on
economic issues. However, it also rejects government intrusion into personal choices in such mat- ters as marijuana use or personal sexual behavior; hence, it is liberal on social issues.
The Libertarian Party is an active, if not always influential, force in Texas politics. The Lib- ertarian Party has a hands-off philosophy of government that appeals to many Texas conserva- tives. The party's general philosophy is one of individual liberty and personal responsibility. Applying their doctrine to the issues, libertarians generally oppose Social Security, campaign finance reform, gun control, and minimum-wage policies. They consider programs like Social Security to be "state-provided welfare" and believe that regulating campaigns promotes too much government involvement. They also oppose U.S. intervention in world affairs.
Liberals Liberals believe that it is often necessary for government to regulate the economy
and to promote greater social equality. They point to high concentrations of wealth and power that have threatened to control government, destroy economic competition, and weaken indi- vidual freedom. Government power, they believe, should be used to protect the disadvantaged and to promote equality. Consequently, liberals are generally supportive of the social welfare programs that conservatives oppose. Liberals champion the right to form labor unions, unem- ployment benefits, universal health care, a universal basic income, subsidized housing, and improved educational opportunities. They are also more likely to favor progressive taxes, such as the federal income tax, for which tax rates increases as incomes rise.
Liberals want the government to protect the civil rights and liberties of individuals and tend to be critical of interference with any exercise of the constitutional rights of free speech, press, religion, assembly, association, and privacy. They are often suspicious of conservatives' attempts to "legislate morality" because of the potential for interference with individual rights.
Decentralization
At first glance, American party organizations may appear to be neatly ordered and hierarchical, with power flowing from the national to state to local parties. In reality, however, American parties are not nearly so hierarchical. They reflect the American federal system, with its decentralization of power to the state and local levels of government. Political party organiza- tions operate at the precinct, or neighborhood, level; the local government level (city, county, or legislative district); the state level (especially in elections for governor); and the national level (especially in elections for president).
State and local party organizations are semi-independent actors that exercise consider- able discretion on most party matters. The practices that state and local parties follow, the candidates they recruit, the campaign money they raise, the innovations they introduce, the organized interests to which they respond, the campaign strategies they create, and most important, the policy orientations of the candidates who run under their label are all influ- enced by local and state political cultures, leaders, traditions, and interests."
Although the American party system is quite decentralized, power has shifted to the national party organizations in recent years. Both the Democratic and Republican national parties have become stronger and more involved in state and local party activities through various service functions. By using new campaign technologies-computer-based mailing lists, direct mail solicitations, and the Internet-the national parties have raised hundreds of millions of dollars. Accordingly, the national party organizations have assumed a greater role by providing unprec- edented levels of assistance to state parties and candidates. This assistance includes a variety of services-candidate recruitment, research, public opinion polling, computer networking, production of digital, radio, and television commercials, direct mailing, social media campaigns, consultation on redistricting issues, and the transfer of millions of dollars' worth of campaign funding. Not surprisingly, as national parties provide more money and services to state and local parties, they exercise more influence over state and local organizations, issues, and candidates."


O 5.2 Analyze the evolution of the party system in Texas.
Although for most of its existence the United States has had a two-party system, many states and localities—including Texas—have been dominated by just one party at various times in history. Texas formerly was a one-party Democratic state but is no longer. To understand political parties in Texas, it is necessary to examine the historical predominance of the Demo-cratic Party, the emergence of two-party competition in the state, and the reality of Republican Party dominance at present

 or opposition to, Sam Houston, a leading founder of the Republic. After Texas became a state, however, the Demo-cratic Party dominated Texas politics until the 1980s. This legacy of dominance was firmly established by the Civil War and the era of Reconstruction, when the U.S. Army, under the direction of a Republican Congress, occupied the South. From the time that the Republican and former Union soldier Edmund J. Davis’s single term as governor ended in 1873 until the surprising victory of the Republican gubernatorial candidate Bill Clements in 1978, the Democrats exercised almost complete control over Texas politics.
The Democratic Party was at times challenged by the emergence of more liberal third parties.
The most serious of these challenges came in the late nineteenth century with the Populist revolt. The Populist Party grew out of the dissatisfaction of small farmers who demanded government regulation of rates charged by banks and railroads. These farmers—joined by sharecroppers, laborers, and African Americans—mounted a serious election bid in 1896, taking 44 percent of the vote for governor. Eventually, however, the Democratic Party defused the threat of the Populists by co-opting many of the issues of the new party. The Democrats also effectively disenfranchised African Americans and poor whites in 1902 with the passage of a poll tax. Two events in the early twentieth century solidified the position of the Democrats in Texas
politics. The first was the institution of party primary “reforms” in 1906. For the first time, voters could choose the party’s nominees by a direct vote in the party primary. Hence, the Democratic primary became the substitute for the two-party contest, the general election. In the absence of Republican competition, the Democratic primary was the only game in town, and it provided a competitive arena for distinct political interests within the state. The second event to help the Democrats was the Depression. Although the Republican presi-dential candidate, Herbert Hoover, carried Texas in 1928, Republicans came to be closely associ-ated with the Great Depression of the 1930s. The cumulative effect of this association, the Civil War, and Reconstruction ensured Democratic dominance in state government until the late 1980s. During this period of Democratic dominance, the election to choose the Democratic Party’s
nominees—the primary—was the most important election in Texas. In one sense, it was a contest between liberal and conservative factions within the party, a contest that the conservatives usually won. That changed as the national Democratic Party shifted in a liberal direction, especially on civil rights in the 1960s, leading conservatives in Texas to increasingly identify with the Republican Party. Gradually, the Republicans became the party of choice for conservatives while Democrats retained most of the liberal and some of the moderate voters in the state. As a result of this ideologi-cal sorting between the two political parties, Republican candidates became competitive in Texas and then eventually dominant in state politics by the twenty-first century, as we will s


The Rise of the Republican Party
Before the presidential election of November 1988, only three post-Reconstruction Repub- licans had won non-presidential statewide races in Texas: Senator John Tower (1961-85), Governor Bill Clements (1979-83 and 1987-91), and Senator Phil Gramm (1985-2003). Why had the Republican Party failed to compete in Texas in the past? The most important reason is Texas's experience in the Civil War and Reconstruction. However, the Republican Party was able to shake its image as the party of occupation during Reconstruction to become Texas's dominant political force.
The Republicans Become Competitive The revival of the Republican Party was foreshadowed in the 1950s by the development of the so-called presidential Republicans (people who vote Republican for national office but Democratic for state and local office). As discussed earlier, conservative Democrats objected to the policy differences between the state and national Democratic parties and often voted for Republican presidential candidates.
The first major step in the rejuvenation of the Republican Party in Texas came in 1961, when John Tower, a Republican, was elected to the U.S. Senate. Tower won a special election held when Lyndon Johnson gave up his Senate seat to assume the vice presidency, and was reelected three times (1966, 1972, 1978), leaving office in 1985 after opting not to run for a fifth term. His seat was retained by another Republican, Phil Gramm, and in 2002, Repub- lican John Cornyn, the state's former attorney general, was elected to replace Gramm, and continues to hold that seat today.
In November 1978, the Republicans achieved their most stunning breakthrough when Bill Clements defeated John Hill in the race for governor. After losing the governor's seat to a moderately conservative Democrat, Mark White, in 1982, Republicans regained their momen- tum in 1986, when Clements turned the tables on White and recaptured the governorship. With the election in 1992 of U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, Republicans held both U.S. Senate seats for the first time since Reconstruction. In 1994, Republican George W. Bush defeated incumbent Democratic Governor Ann Richards, and Republicans have held the governorship ever since.
By far the most impressive gains for the GOP came in the November 1998 elections, when incumbent Governor George W. Bush led a sweep of Republicans to victory in every statewide election. The Republicans had gained control of the state senate in 1996 and won complete control of the entire legislature in 2002 after winning a majority in the Texas House of Rep- resentatives. Table 5.1 shows the dramatic increases by Republicans in the Texas Legislature

and the Texas delegation to the U.S. House of Representatives. In 2004, after a successful second effort at congressional redistricting, the GOP captured a majority in Texas's congres- sional delegation as well.
The Era of Republican Dominance The Republican Party continues to domi- nate Texas state politics. Most observers now agree that Texas has experienced a party realignment, the long-term transition from a system in which one party is consistently domi- nant to one in which another party is consistently dominant. After more than a century of Democratic Party domination after the Civil War, the pendulum has swung to the Republican Party. Realignment involves more than just casting a vote for a Republican Party candidate; it refers to a shift in attachment to political parties, which is called partisan identification. Evidence of Texas becoming a Republican-dominated state comes from public opinion polls that show that many more Texans are identifying with the Republican Party than in the past.? As Table 5.2 indicates, in 1952, an overwhelming percentage of Texans who identified with a political party were Democrats; indeed, only 6 percent considered themselves Republicans, compared with 66 percent for the Democrats. (The remaining 28 percent considered them- selves "independents.")
In 1996, four decades later, polls showed that identification among Texans with the Repub- lican Party exceeded that for the Democratic Party. From Table 5.2, we also can see that the total percentage of partisans decreased during the period, which suggests a period of dealignment, in which increasing numbers of voters choose not to identify with either of the two parties and consider themselves to be independents instead. This is not surprising in transition from the one-party Democratic control to Republican dominance, as many Repub- lican-voting Democrats did not completely switch parties, at least for a while.
Partisanship increased thereafter but the Republican edge remained slight. However, a larger portion of independents said they "leaned" toward the Republican Party and these

party realignment
The long-term transition from a system in which one party is consistently dominant to one in which another party is consistently dominant.
partisan identification
A person's attachment to one political party or the other.
dealignment
When increasing numbers of voters choose not to identify with either of the two parties and consider themselves to be independents.


"leaners" tend to vote very much like partisans on election day. By 2022, the Republicans maintained a slight 36 to 32 percent lead among party identifiers, but held a larger 48-42 advantage when Republican-leaning independents were included. Thus, Republicans are now able to domi- nate state politics by consistently winning among voters who call themselves independents.
The rise of the Republican Party in Texas has been dramatic, though it didn't happen overnight. To a large extent, the rise of the Republican Party in Texas reflected the sorting of voters' identification to match their conserva- tive ideological orientations. This takes time, as partisan identification in the electorate changes slowly. Political sci- entists have shown that people's dispositions toward the par- ties begin to develop at an early age and that our parents are particularly influential." As these dispositions are reinforced, say, by interactions with friends and neighbors, identifica- tions harden and become resistant to change. This does not mean that they do not change, of course. Part of the big gains for the Republicans in Texas reflected a shift among conservative Anglo Democrats. After years of voting Repub- lican in presidential elections but identifying as Democrats, they began thinking of themselves as Republicans.
What stimulated the change was the behavior of the parties and their candidates. Of special importance was the liberal shift in policies under Democratic presidents during the 1960s. Most notable was the expansion of civil rights, which seems to have led many Anglo voters to defect to the

Republican Party even as many African American voters came to align with the Democratic Party.10
Ironically, the main proponent of these policies was Texas’s own President Lyndon B.
Johnson (1963–69). He pushed through a wide variety of other liberal legislation during his presidency, and there is reason to think that this also influenced voters’ perceptions and party alignments. From Table 5.2, it is clear that even these effects were not felt immediately in Texas, as the Democratic lead over the Republicans remained a sizable 43 percent even as late as 1972. The performance of Republican presidents also mattered. The election of Ronald Reagan
may have been of particular consequence. His victory over the unpopular Democrat Jimmy Carter in 1980 began a 12-year run of Republican control of the White House. Under Reagan, the economy boomed, as did his approval ratings, and the Cold War came to an end. During this short time, the Republicans virtually closed the massive gap with the Democrats in Texas. The election of George W. Bush to the presidency in 2000 and then again in 2004 helped solidify the Republican realignment in Texas, as he had been very popular among the state’s voters, first as governor and then as president. Party switching by native Texans is only part of the story of realignment. Another factor
involves newcomers to the state, who came in large numbers during the 1970s and 1980s. These migrants to Texas were less Democratic in their affiliations, and this helped break down traditional partisan patterns. Perhaps the most important newcomers of all have been those from within Texas—the offspring of Texas residents. As Texans switched affiliations and newcomers from other states further diluted the Democratic advantage, young people reflected their parents’ more balanced partisanship. Moreover, the short-term forces that swayed their parents tended to have an even greater impact on them, both as children and as young adults going off to vote for the first or second tim

Sources of Republican Strengths and Weaknesses Republican support is strong in a broad swath of rural counties and in most small and medium-sized cities. See Figure 5.1 to view the Republican support throughout Texas’s counties. As you can see, the concentration of Republicans is in these following areas: • The outermost suburban and exurban ring around the major metro areas • West Texas north of Interstate 10 • East Texas • Hill Country–Edwards Plateau
Figure 5.1 Results of the 2022 Election for Governor This map shows that Democrat Beto O’Rourke carried only 19 of Texas’s 254 counties, but he did win the most votes in four of the five most populous urban counties containing the cities of Houston (Harris), Dallas (Dallas), San Antonio (Bexar), and Austin (Travis). Republican Governor Greg Abbott dominated in all of the less populous counties other than those in the U.S.–Mexico border region


Republican Party support is weaker in the following areas:
South Central Texas
The major central cities of Austin, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio
• The Border region from the Rio Grande Valley to El Paso
Public opinion data in Table 5.3 show that the Republican Party appeals more to Anglo voters, those who are older, and men. Anglos without college degrees are also slightly more likely to identify as Republicans. Not all people in these categories are Republicans, of course, but they are more likely to be. As seen in Table 5.3, Republican support is strongest in exurban and rural areas as well as smaller towns and cities, and this is true across the country.
Conservative and Moderate Republicans
As the Republican Party became dominant in Texas politics, it began to experience some of the same sort of factional differences that had characterized the Democratic Party in Texas for years. For example, a bloc of conservative Christians, sometimes referred to as evangelical or fundamentalist Christians, began in the 1980s to play an increasingly prominent role in the Texas Republican Party. These social conservatives are most concerned with such issues as family, religion, and community morals and have been effective in influencing the party platform, whose "planks" contain the party's formal issue positions. Associated with a broad spectrum of Protestant Christianity that emphasizes salvation and traditional values, evangeli- cal voters are likely to support culturally conservative politics and policies.


vement conservatives, a faction or group of very conservative Republicans generally resistant to compromise of their principles. A passionate conservative faction that began as the tea party movement, it strongly opposes taxation and the social services it finances, and it generally favors less government power over individuals’ economic choices. The movement began in response to the federal bailout of financial institutions in 2008 and President Barack Obama’s health care initiative the following year, but it has expanded greatly under the influence of Donald Trump. Today, movement conservatives have turned their energy toward opposing immigration, abortion, gun control, affirmative action, and LGBTQ rights. Movement conservatives have worked within the Republican Party and have been respon-sible for the nomination of numerous conservative candidates around the country. These candidates have not fared well in a few states, sometimes proving to be too extreme or inex-perienced. In Texas, however, movement conservatives have supported most successful candi-dates, including Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick, Attorney General Ken Paxton, and U.S. Senator Ted Cruz. Movement conservatives have been less enthusiastic about more pragmatic and consensual Republican elected officials such as Texas House Speaker Dade Phelan and U.S. Senator John Cornyn. The control of the state’s Republican Party by the conservative, or right wing,
Image 5.3 Ted Cruz is a conservative Texas Republican who has been supported by both Christian conservatives and movement conservatives. Sample the Cruz appeal at https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=nrGAbZkgqmM.
is opposed by the more moderate, or centrist-conservative wing. Many of these centrist conservatives disagree with movement conservative positions and are more compromising in outlook. These are often called “establishment” Republicans, man

of whom represent business interests. They are generally fiscal conservatives, who want to keep taxes low and limit the government's interference in the market, but differ from movement conservatives because they support spending for education and infrastructure and are more tolerant of immigration and civil rights for ethnic and sexual minorities. The establishment Republicans also differ from Christian conservatives by placing less of a premium on moral issues. The future ideological and policy direction of the party thus remains uncertain, but at present, movement conservatives dominate the Republican Party, both in Texas and in most other states as well.
Can the Democrats Compete?
Some observers believe that Texas will emerge as a competitive two-party state in the near future. They note that Democrats still have considerable resources in many local governments, especially in several major cities and in parts of South and Far West Texas. Although Democrats showed some signs of becoming more competitive in the statewide elections of 2018 and 2020, their successes remained confined to local and regional offices in 2022, when Republican candidates outperformed Democrats by a margin of between 10 and 15 percent in every statewide race.

Nevertheless, Democrats continue to hold a real advantage in most of the largest urban
areas in Texas, and this has grown in recent years. Table 5.3 further shows that Democrats do well with young people and women, and this support has grown of late. Voters from ethnic and racial minority communities have been a long-standing source
of electoral strength for Democrats in Texas and throughout the country. Not surprisingly, Democratic strategists are encouraged by the state’s growing Latino population. Ethnic and racial minorities now make up a majority of the state’s population, and the Latino population in Texas exceeds the number of non-Hispanic whites (Anglos).11
Figure 5.2
shows that Latinos are already the majority ethnic group in Bexar County as well as most rural counties in South and West Texas. Because Democrats have won a majority of Latino votes in the past, party strategists have held out hope that the growth in the Latino population would lead to a phenomenon known as tipping—that is, when a group grows large enough to change the political balance in the electorate. However, Democratic hopes that the Latino population would power their resurgence have been frustrated by their low voter turnout. Furthermore, Republicans have been able to appeal to a significant minority of Latino
voters and have made gains in South Texas. Republican Governor Greg Abbott won 40 percent of the Texas Latino vote in 2022 against Democrat Beto O’Rourke, about the same portion as Republican President Trump had garnered in his 2020 reelection bid. In contrast, support for Democrats has been much higher among African Americans; for example, Abbott received only 15 percent of their vote in the 2022 election. Republican party strategists hope that many Latino

Republican party strategists hope that many Latino voters will support the GOP because they believe their party is more in tune with some Latino voters' identification with conservative social positions and family values; some working-class Latinos also share values with working-class Anglos, who have been trending toward the GOP. As a result, Republicans have devoted enormous resources to win a larger share of the Latino vote.
Democrats, on the other hand, believe that Latinos will continue to be attracted to their party because of its support for civil rights and spending on public ser- vices, and because some Latinos have come to regard Republicans' more strident anti-immigrant positions as an affront to their heritage and identity. Democrats also hope to win the support of younger Latinos as they appeal to the members of Generation Z across all ethnic groups.
Some observers have suggested that a substantial number of Latino voters are potential swing voters, those who are not bound by party identification and who support candidates of different parties in different election years. How things will play out for Democrats in Texas may depend on what the parties do moving for- ward. Immigration mostly likely will be part of the story, but so will other issues as well. The choices politicians make at both the national and state levels can matter for support among Latinos as they do for the broader electorate as a whole.

Figure 5.2 Texas Latino Population by County Democrats pin their hopes for the future on demographic changes such as the fast-growing Latino population. Latinos already constitute about 40 percent of the Texas population, but many are not yet eligible to vote because they are too young or are not citizens. Among those who are eligible, Latino turnout rates also have been lower than for Anglos and African American


The Organization of Texas Political Parties LO 5.3 Evaluate the importance of party organization.
To better understand how political parties are organized in Texas, we can divide the party machinery into two parts: the temporary, consisting of a series of conventions at various levels that happen in each election year, and the permanent, consisting of people elected to leadership positions in the party and who continue in those positions between elections (see Figure 5

igure 5.3 Texas Political Party Organization This figure shows the three levels of state party organization in Texas. Party primary voters elect precinct and county chairs who serve as the county executive committee. Primary voters may also attend neighborhood precinct conventions that elect delegates to higher conventions that fill out the rest of the state’s party structure


Temporary Party Organization
Consisting of precinct, county or district, and state conventions, the temporary party organizations select delegates to higher conventions that ultimately write party rules, approve the state party plat- forms, and select the permanent party structures that manage party affairs between conventions.
Precinct Convention The starting point of party activity and a key to getting involved in politics is the precinct convention, a gathering of the party faithful that is open to primary voters. After the March primary in even-numbered years, the parties each hold precinct conventions at times and places published on party websites. The agenda of these conventions includes adoption of resolutions to be passed on to the county or senatorial district convention and selection of delegates to the county or senatorial district convention. Although eligibility for participation in this grassroots level of democracy is open to all who vote in the first primary election, attendance is minimal-usually only 2 to 3 percent of


those who vote. This low attendance makes it possible for a small, determined minority of the electorate to assume control of the precinct convention and dominate its affairs. Sometimes contending factions or supporters of different presidential candidates are bitterly divided, and some of the attendees will walk out and conduct their own convention, called a “rump conven-tion.” If this happens, both precinct groups will appeal to the credentials committee appointed by the county executive committee. The credentials committee will decide which set of rival delegates is officially seated at the county or district convention. Although fairness and justice may occasionally be considered, the decision on which group to seat usually depends on which faction is in the majority on the credentials committee.
County or Senatorial District Conventions In the weeks after the primary and the precinct conventions, delegates selected at precinct conventions attend countywide conventions, except in the most populous counties, where they instead attend separate conventions in each senatorial district. Delegates vote on resolutions and select delegates to attend the state convention. As with the precinct conventions, ideological factions and supporters of different presiden-tial candidates compete to dominate the delegate selection process. In Texas, bitter intra-party conflict once divided the Democratic Party more than the Republicans, but as the Republican Party became the dominant party and won control of state politics, it divided into the various factions—establishment, social and movement conservatives—that began to fight to control its primaries and conventions as well.
State Conventions Both the Democratic and Republican parties in Texas hold state conventions in late spring or early summer in even-numbered years. The major functions of these biennial state conventions are to do the following: • Elect state party officers. • Elect 62 of the members to the state executive committee, two from each senatorial district. • Adopt a party platform (see Table 5.3 on the following page for examples of recent Texas party platform planks).
• Modify state party rules. If it is a presidential election year, the state convention also does the following:
• Select the party’s nominees to serve as Texas’s members ofthe national party executive committee. • Select nominees for the state’s 40 presidential electors, who will serve if the party carries the state in the presidential election.
• Elect most delegates to the party’s national nominating convention based on the presiden-tial primary vot

Historically, Texas parties used the convention system to express their preference for candidates for their party's presidential nomination. Voters who wanted a role in choosing their party's presiden- tial candidate had to attend precinct conventions to choose delegates to the county or district con- ventions and ultimately to the state conventions. The state party conventions then had a free hand in choosing delegates to the national convention, which selects the party's nominee for president.
Over the years, each party has moved toward using a presidential preference primary system to allow its party's voters to express their preference among candidates seeking their party's nomination for president. Today, most of the delegates that the state party conventions select to attend national nominating conventions must be pledged to presidential candidates based on the outcome of the presidential primary. However, the state convention does sometimes send stealth delegates to the national convention who are pledged to one presidential candidate, but whose loyalties are with another.
Permanent Party Organization
The permanent structure of the party machinery consists of people selected to lead the party organization and provide continuity between election campaigns.

Table 5.4 Excerpts from Recent Texas Democratic and Republican Party Platforms
This table shows some selected planks in the 2022 platforms. Party platforms often reflect the views of the most passionate partisans and are often ignored by the party's candidates during their campaigns.
Democratic Party
"Support the elimination of the Electoral College and join the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact [to allocate their electoral votes to whichever presidential candidate wins the national popular vote), and until the compact is effective, proportionally award Texas' presidential electoral votes based on the US presidential votes within the state."
"Legalize the possession and use of cannabis, medicinal and recreational, and its derivatives in Texas..."
"Fight for the human right to an abortion....[e]nsure individual rights to obtain all forms of contraception, including...abortion care, and other reproductive services through their health insurance provider without additional premiums."
"Require universal background checks [for gun buyers] coupled with a reasonable waiting period, with the exception of an exchange of firearms within families or by inheritance, to ensure those charged with violent crimes cannot possess or acquire firearms while their charges remain pending...."
"Ensure equal protections and rights for all lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual, and other non-cis non-heterosexual or LGBTQIA+ people."
"Strengthen independent oversight of all investigations into police conduct by requiring independent prosecutors to investigate questionable officer-involved actions."
"Abolish the death penalty."
"Enhance training for law enforcement personnel on hate crime identification, response and reporting, including training on cyberstalking, cyberbullying and other forms of online expressions or actions of hate."
"Protect the US Supreme Court decisions which guaranteed the rights to same-sex sexual activity, marriage equality, and the full benefits of marriage to all couples."
No similar provision.
Source: Texas Democratic Party and the Republican Party of Texas.
Republican Party
"The National Popular Vote Interstate Compact is a direct violation of Article 1, Section 10, and Article 2, Section 1, of the Constitution and shall be rejected by Texas and all its officials. We support the electoral college."
"We oppose the legalization of recreational marijuana..."
"Since life begins at fertilization, we urge the Texas Legislature to abolish abortion through enacting legislation that would immediately secure the rights to life and would nullify any and all federal statutes, regulations, orders, and court rulings that would deny these rights."
"State and Federal Legislatures shall... [nullify any gun laws that violate the 2nd Amendment or rights of due process."
"Homosexuality is an abnormal lifestyle choice.... We oppose all efforts to validate transgender identity."
"We express our gratitude and appreciation for police officers, firefighters, and other first responders. We support them in the exercise of their duties."
"Properly applied capital punishment is legitimate and should be reasonably swift, while respecting all due process."
"We urge the complete repeal of the hate crime laws, since ample laws are currently in effect to punish criminal behavior towards other persons."
"We believe the Obergefell v. Hodges decision, overturning the Texas law prohibiting same-sex marriage in Texas, has no basis in the Constitution and should be nullified."
"We urge the Texas Legislature to pass bill in its next session requiring a referendum in the 2023 General Election for the people of Texas to determine whether or not the State of Texas should reassert its status as an independent nation."
► How does each of these platform positions reflect the ideological differences between conservative and liberal positions on public policy?

c How does each of these platform positions reflect the ideological differences between conservative and liberal positions on public policy?
Precinct-Level Organization At the lowest, or grassroots, level of the party structure is the precinct chair, who is chosen by the precinct’s voters in the primary for a two-year term. Often the position is uncontested, and in some precincts, the person can be elected by a write-in vote. The chair serves as party organizer in the precinct, contacting known and potential party members. The chair may help organize party activities in the neighborhood, such as vote


gistration drives. The precinct chair is also responsible for arranging and presiding over the precinct convention and serving as a member of the county executive committee.
County-Level Organization A much more active and important role is that of county chair. The voters choose who will hold this office for a two-year term in the party primary. The chair presides over the county executive committee, which is composed of all precinct chairs. The county chair determines where the voting places will be for the party primary and appoints election judges subject to approval of the county commissioners court. Accepting candidates for places on the primary ballot, the printing of paper ballots, and the renting of voting machines are also the chair’s responsibilities. Finally, the chair, along with the county executive committee, must certify the names of official nominees of the party to the secretary of state’s office. The county executive committee has three major functions: assembling the temporary roll of
delegates to the county convention; canvassing the returns from the primary for local offices; and helping the county chair prepare the primary ballot, accept filing fees, and conduct a drawing to determine the order of candidates’ names on the primary ballot. This is an important consideration since some low-information voters may opt for the first name they come across on the ballot.
State-Level Organization Delegates to the state convention choose the state chair—the titular head of the party—at the state convention for a two-year term. The duties of the chair are to preside over the state executive committee’s meetings, call the state convention to order, handle the requests ofstatewide candidates on the ballot, and certify the primary winners to the secretary ofstate. The state executive committee includes a chair and a vice chair of the opposite sex. In addi-tion, the Democratic and Republican state convention delegates choose one man and one woman from each of the 31 state senate districts. Unlike the Republicans, the Democrats also include several members from various special caucuses on their state executive committee. The main legal duties of the state executive committee are to determine the site of the next state conven-tion, to canvass statewide primary returns, and to certify the nomination of party candidates. The state executive committee also has some political duties, including producing and dis-seminating press releases and other publicity, encouraging organizational work in precincts and counties, raising money, and coordinating special projects. The state committee may work closely with the national party. These political chores are so numerous that the execu-tive committees of both parties now employ full-time executive directors and staff assistants.
The Functions of Political Parties LO 5.4 Assess the functions of political parties in American and Texas politics.
Political parties developed and survived because they perform important functions. In his conceptualization of parties, political scientist V. O. Key identified three main “faces”: the party in the electorate, the party as organization, and the party in government.12
The Party in the Electorate The party in the electorate refers to the identification of citizens with the parties, which we discussed earlier in this chapter. The nature and degree of this party attachment is important, whether they are strong or weak partisans or leaning independents. Partisan identification (Party ID) affects not only what voters do, but also how they view the political world. These views, in turn, influence what the party organization and party in government do.
The Party as Organization The party as organization is the formal structure of the party itself, which we have discussed in detail as well. This is what first comes to mind for most people when they think about what a political party is: the precinct, district, state, and national conventions that parties hold i


election years, and the officers at the various levels who actually set up and run party activities, including the primaries themselves. Party organizations do more than this, however. They actively recruit candidates for office,
and though they do not control how voters cast their ballots, they can try to influence who wins the primary election. Party organizations also work to help their nominees win in the general election. This involves raising money, providing services (campaign organization and advice), and getting out the vote. Getting out the vote includes interactions with the party in the electorate by phone, social media, and even door-to-door canvassing. The more organized the party, the more effective it is in getting out the vote for its candidates. Party organizations not only mobilize their supporters to vote, but they also represent their
views on public policy as they support the candidates that party members have nominated in the primaries; they shape the party platforms and help organize political campaigns that focus on par-ticular themes that reflect the values and aspirations of their voters. Of course, leaders in the party organization do not simply reflect the views of ordinary party voters; they have their own perspec-tives and often take the lead on issues that reflect the views of donors and interest groups as well.
The Party in Government The party in government consists of the elected officials in government and what they do while there. Co-partisans work together in ways that can determine how government institutions work and which policy outputs they produce. Elected officials of the same party have similar prefer-ences on many issues, and they have a shared interest in pushing forward their positions. For example, the Republicans who control the Texas governorship, statewide elected positions, and a majority of the Legislature usually work closely together as a team to press their shared agenda. When one party controls both houses of the legislature and the governorship (a “trifecta”),
state policy is often quite partisan, as it has been in Texas and in most states in which a single party controls the instruments of state government. On the other hand, when different parties control the distinct branches of state government, compromise occasionally results, as happened when Maryland and Massachusetts had moderate Republican governors who were able to work effectively with Democratic legislatures. However, in today’s polarized political environment, divided control of state government more often results in gridlock in which neither party is able to move its agenda and thus inaction results. In fact, there has been outright hostility between the Democratic governors and Republican legislatures in North Carolina and Wisconsin. See the How Does Texas Compare feature on the following page. The parties in government also serve other functions. They are the parties’ most visible
faces and often create the public image of their party among the electorate. Elected officials are on the political front lines, so to speak, driving the policy agenda and the policy-making process. They are at the center of political advocacy and debate. Not surprisingly, they occupy the attention of the mass media. The parties’ leading politicians use the media to frame the political debate for voters, especially their partisans. The goal, of course, is to communicate their positions to the public and mobilize support. In the process, the parties in government help voters make sense of the issues, if only imperfectly. Providing a basic understanding of the parties’ positions on the issues of the day allows voters to make a more informed choice between the parties in the voting booth. This is critical to representative democracy.
Applying What You Have Learned about Texas Political Parties LO 5.5 Apply what you have learned about Texas political parties.
You have learned that Texas remains a predominantly Republican state but that Democrats are beginning to show remarkable signs of political life as some demographic groups and geographic areas have begun to realign with them. So, we asked Keir Murray, a practicing political consultant, to provide you with an on-the-ground view of political realignment as it is happening in Texas’s largest metropolitan areas such as Harris County


How Does Texas Compare?
Party Control of Government in the 50 States
Figure 5.4 shows the states in which one party controls the executive and both chambers of the legislature (blue for Democratic, red for Republican) and states in which control is divided, depicted in yellow. (Nebraska, shown in white, officially has a nonpartisan legislature, though in fact, both the majority of legislators and the governor are Republicans.) Most (40) states including Texas are
controlled by a single party; in only 10 states is control divided between the two political parties.
In today's highly partisan and polarized political environment, which party controls a state's political institutions dramatically impacts state policies. Where Democrats control, sometimes even by a narrow margin, states are likely to enact quite liberal policies; Republican control usually ensures adoption of a fervently conservative agenda. Where party control in a state is divided, policy outcomes are much less predictable.

Keir Murray is the founder and principal of KLM Public Affairs, LLC, a strategic consulting practice based in Houston. For over 20 years he has worked extensively in the private, public and nonprofit sectors, as well as in the political arena. Current and former political clients include two mayors of Houston, the Harris County Sheriff's Office, the City of Houston controller, and dozens of Houston-area members of the U.S. Congress, Texas Legislature, and Houston City Council.
Politics in Practice
Harris County's Political Journey, Red to Blue and Beyond
by Keir Murray
Founder of KLM Public Affairs
As Texas Republicans rose to political dominance in the 1980s and 1990s, their performance in Harris County, the state's largest county and home to Houston, was key to their success. Fast forward to the 2020s, demographic and political change are making Texas competitive again after a quarter century, and developments in Harris County are a big reason why.
Jimmy Carter was the last Democrat to carry Texas in a presidential election in 1976. In 1980, Ronald Reagan began a 40-year GOP winning streak in the Lone Star State, earning 2.5 million of Texas' 4.5 million votes for president, 55 percent of the vote. Reagan ran even stronger in Harris County, where he earned 58 percent of the 720,000 votes cast.
Over the next nearly three decades Harris County, which makes up about 15 percent of the statewide vote, increasingly became a Republican stronghold as the GOP won the vast majority of countywide contests from the top to the bottom of the ballot. The margins of victory were normally solid, if not massive, and bolstered Republican statewide candidates as well as maintaining control of nearly all county administrative and judicial offices. Even as this Republican winning streak persisted however, rapid political and population changes in Harris County sowed the seeds of a Democratic comeback.
Harris County's population roughly doubled between 1980 and 2020, and today approaches 5 million residents and 2.5 million registered voters. The nation's third most populous county is also one of its most diverse. The Census Bureau's 2019 American Community Survey estimated Harris County's population to be 44 percent Latino, 29 percent White, 20 percent Black and 7 percent Asian American. As the global headquarters of the energy industry and home of the Texas Medical Center, the largest medical complex in the world, Harris County also boasts a high concentration of college-educated professionals.
Even as Harris County's population rapidly grew and diversified, Republicans maintained control of the county with a solid White conservative base, and helped by relatively low voter participation among communities of color and a couple of broadly popular Texas favorite sons named Bush occupying the White House.
By 2008, political change was in the air, both nationally and in Harris County. George W. Bush, the former popular Texas governor, saw his political fortunes decline as an unpopular war in Iraq and a lackluster federal response to Hurricane Katrina dragged down the second term of his presidency. Indeed, in the 2006 midterm election, Democrats gained 31 U.S. House seats and
six Senate seats to win control of both houses of Congress for the first time since 1994. Locally, Democratic lawyers and funders focused on recapturing the courthouse were buoyed by Dallas County's recent blue shift and saw an opportunity to achieve similar results in Harris County. Beginning in 2006, they raised significant money to fund and organize a countywide
coordinated campaign to turn out as many Democratic voters as possible and vote straight
party Democrat (an option for Texas voters until 2020), benefitting team blue candidates from
top to bottom of the ballot.
In 2008, those efforts paid off with a massive assist from the unlikely emergence of a young, charismatic first-term Illinois senator named Barack Obama as the Democratic nominee for president.
The March 2008 primary in Texas was an early indication of next level enthusiasm among Democratic voters. After a spirited battle in early state contests, the presidential nomination race narrowed to a contest between Obama and presumptive favorite Hillary Clinton. Both campaigns spent heavily in Texas to mobilize their supporters. As a result, nearly 3 million Texans voted in the Democratic primary, 23 percent of all registered voters in the state. In Harris County, 411 thousand of the county's 1.8 million registered voters cast ballots in the Democratic primary, with Obama winning by 52 thousand votes.
In the November general election, neither the Obama nor the McCain campaign put resources into Texas, which McCain won comfortably by about 12 percentage points. But the battle for Harris County was fierce. Obama carried the county by about 19 thousand votes, largely on the strength of strong performance with college-educated professionals and outsized African American turnout. The Black population is about 20 percent in Harris County, but Black voters in 2008 made up a quarter of the local electorate. And Democrats down ballot benefitted.
Democrats had a 47 thousand vote edge over Republicans in straight party voting in Harris County, which has one of the longest voting ballots in America. This advantage delivered most judgeships to the Democrats in 2008, as well as other county offices including Sheriff and County Attorney.
While the 2008 election broke Republicans' iron grip on Harris County government, it would be another eight years before the county moved completely into the Democratic column. The two midterm elections of the Obama presidency-2010 and 2014-were difficult for Democrats nationally, and locally in Harris County. Lower Democratic turnout without Obama on the ballot and a highly motivated GOP base delivered victories for Harris County Republicans up and down the ticket. In his 2012 re-election effort, Obama carried the county by less than a thousand votes, and Democrats won a little more than half of countywide offices.
After a back and forth eight-year battle between the two major parties in Harris County, the emergence of Donald Trump in 2016 broke the political dam for the Democrats. Trump's nativist rhetoric and lowest common denominator style of politics did not play well here. While Trump's message clearly resonated with White working-class voters in the Rust Belt, it proved disastrous for Republicans in highly diverse Harris County.
Just four years after Barack Obama squeaked out a 971-vote margin out of nearly 1.2 million ballots cast, Hillary Clinton blew the doors off in Harris County, winning by more than 12 percentage points and nearly 162 thousand votes. Locally, Democrats swept every countywide office.
Two years later in 2018, Harris County Republicans suffered the same fate that befell Democrats in 2010. A backlash against the Trump presidency and his absence from the midterm ballot proved disastrous for the GOP. They lost countywide races by even larger margins than 2016, including the shocking defeat of the popular county judge, which tipped control of the county's executive body to the Democrats.
Finally, in 2020, while Trump inspired higher turnout among Republicans as well as Democrats, he lost Harris County by about 218 thousand votes, and the Democratic again won every countywide office.
What does the future hold in Harris County? In the short term, Democrats are likely to continue their dominance. The White share of the county's population is now below 30 percent, and the voting share is down to about 50 percent. In addition, college-educated professionals have continued their exodus from the Republican Party. There was improved GOP performance among voters of color in 2020, particularly Latinos. Whether these behavioral changes were unique to Trump or prove durable remains to be seen and will be defining for Harris County's political future.

Questions for Critical Thinking
1. What are the particular historical events that led to the recent rise of the Democratic Party in Harris County? Do these changes represent a long-term realignment, or are they temporary?
2. Which specific demographic groups are becoming part of the Democratic base in Harris County? Are these trends unique to Harris County or do they reflect a broad pattern in large metropolitan areas across the state?


Chapter Summary
LO 5.1 Identify the characteristics of American political parties. There are three fundamental characteristics of political parties in the United States: (1) the two-party system.
(2) pragmatism and ideology, and (3) decentralization.
We have two major parties in the United States and Texas partly because the electoral system-specifically, single- member districts and plurality elections-makes it hard for third parties to succeed. Election laws put in place by the two major parties make it difficult for third parties to emerge in the first place.
Parties in the United States and Texas traditionally have been pragmatic, focused on performance more than policy positions. This is largely the result of there being two parties, which makes it necessary to build majority coalitions to compete and to appeal to voters who are moderate and focused on performance. Recently, however, parties in the United States and Texas have become more programmatic, and Democrats and Republicans have become polarized in their ideologies.
Parties in the United States and Texas are decentralized, with much of the control of the nominating process (the primary) and party machinery in the hands of state and local leaders and voters.
LO 5.2 Analyze the evolution of the party system in Texas. For much of its history, Texas was a one-party Democratic state. For more than a century after the Civil War, one-party dominance meant that the election to select the Democratic Party's nominees the Democratic primary-was the most important election in Texas. Liberal and conservative factions within the Democratic Party became the key political players.
After years of domination by the Democratic Party, Texas began to experience strong two-party competition in the 1980s, and in the late 1990s the Republicans became the dominant party in Texas. By the turn of the century, political realignment was fairly complete.

By 2003, the GOP controlled the governor's office, all other statewide offices, and both chambers of the state legislature; in 2004, Republicans captured a majority in the state's congressional delegation. The Republicans remain the majority party, but Democrats are gaining in urban and suburban areas. What will happen in the long run is less clear, particularly as the state's Latino population grows and becomes more involved in politics.
LO 5.3 Evaluate the importance of party organization.
Political parties consist of permanent organizations that manage operations in between elections and the temporary structures, which are the conventions that convene only in election years. Party primary voters attend precinct conventions that select delegates to county or district conventions, which, in turn, choose delegates to the state convention to write the party platform and the rules that govern the party's ongoing operations.
LO 5.4 Assess the functions of political parties in American and Texas politics. Despite the hostility of the Founders to political parties, they have become an important part of American political life. Parties perform critical functions in a democracy. They nominate and elect their candidates to public office, educate and mobilize voters, and run the government at the different levels (local, state, or national).
LO 5.5 Apply what you have learned about Texas political parties. You explored the view of a professional political consultant, Keir Murray, about party realignment as it is taking place in Harris County and other populous metro areas. You learned how Black and Latino voters are part of the Democratic base and how better educated professionals are moving toward the Democrats in reaction to former President Trump's influence on the Republican Party. Finally, you considered whether these trends will affect party alignment in the future.






































































