ANSWER KEY
1. The correct answer is D. The two Fronde revolts of 1648–1649 and 1651–1652 opposed the regency
government of the Italian Cardinal Mazarin who attempted to centralize monarchical rule while governing for
the underage Louis XIV. The Paris Parliament and the nobility objected to Mazarin's reforms and new taxes
imposed to pay off debt from the Thirty Years' War. The revolts were undermined as powerful aristocratic
rivals fought among themselves. The revolt concluded with most French agreeing that strong royal rule was
the best guarantee of stability and security.
2. The correct answer is C. Louis XIV's controller general of finance, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, was a
mercantilist. He favored a heavily regulated economy designed to increase the gold reserves in state coffers.
Colbert subsidized key industries with tax exemptions, loans, and other measures. He also built roads and
canals to encourage domestic trade and commerce and heavily taxed imported manufactured goods.
3. The correct answer is E. The Treaty of Utrecht, which ended the War of the Spanish Succession,
allowed the Bourbons to rule Spain but stated that the two Bourbon kingdoms of Spain and France would
never be united. Austria received the Spanish Netherlands, Naples, and Milan. However, England benefited
the most from the Peace of Utrecht, receiving Gibraltar and French possessions in North America.
4. The correct answer is D. Spain's power declined significantly after the death of Philip II in 1598. The
reign of Philip IV (1621–1625) offered hope for a revival of Spanish power as Gaspar de Guzman, count of
Olivares, worked to centralize the royal government and reduce the power of the Catholic Church and
Spanish aristocracy. His reforms ultimately failed, in part because Guzman and Philip refused to abandon
Spain's ambitions to former imperial glory.
5. The correct answer is D. Following the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648), the Austrian Habsburgs were
forced to abandon their ambition to establish a strong empire in Germany. However, during the eighteenth
century, Austria extended its imperial control into Eastern Europe, at the expense of the Ottoman Empire.
The Treaty of Karlowitz (1699) granted Austria control of Hungary, Croatia, Slovenia, and Transylvania.
6. The correct answer is E. Poland's Sejm was Poland's diet or parliament, a two-house legislature
dominated by the landed aristocracy. In order to gain the throne, prospective Polish monarchs had to agree to
share power with the Sejm in matters of taxation, foreign policy, and administrative appointments. Central
control was extremely limited. The adoption of the liberum veto in 1652 allowed a single dissenting vote to
stop meetings of the Sejm and resulted in chaos.
7. The correct answer is D. The most significant Romanov tsar of eighteenth–century Russia was Peter the
Great (r. 1689–1725). Peter decided to westernize Russia and toured Western nations looking for ideas. He
modernized and enlarged the army, created a navy, and reformed the government. However, he kept all
political power in his own hands and required the landed class to serve the state either militarily or in a civil
capacity. He also established control over the Orthodox Church. In attempt to further tie his country to
Western Europe, he established the city of St. Petersburg with its warm-water port.
8. The correct answer is B. James II sparked the Glorious Revolution when he suspended laws in an effort
to restore Catholicism in England. In 1688, William of Orange invaded England with broad support from
England's elite and drove James into exile. The Glorious Revolution was peaceful and the eventual settlement
increased the influence of Parliament by requiring William and his wife, Mary, to accept a bill of rights
before ascending to the throne. In 1707, England and Scotland were formally joined in the United Kingdom. 
ANSWER KEY
9. The correct answer is B. In 1651, Thomas Hobbes published his Leviathan, which was based on
observations made during the violent upheavals of the English Civil War of the prior decade. Hobbes
believed that humans benefited greatly from the social cohesion provided by a strong state. He is famous for
claiming that without rulers, humans faced a life that was "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short." Faced
with the unpleasant implication of anarchy, humans made an agreement to form a society or a
commonwealth. Hobbes believed that in order to preserve the peace within the commonwealth, absolute
power needed to be vested in a sovereign authority, usually a monarch. Hobbs was not a democrat.
10. The correct answer is D. Gian Lorenzo Bernini's The Ecstasy of Saint Theresa is a famous example of
Baroque art. It was commissioned for the Cornaro Chapel in the Church of Santa Maria della Vittoria in
Rome. The Baroque style combined classical ideals of the Renaissance with the spirituality of the Catholic
Reformation and used dramatic effects to arouse strong emotions in the viewer. Noted for its rich detail, the
Baroque style was particularly popular at Versailles and other royal palaces of the seventeenth century.
11. The correct answer is D. Catherine the Great corresponded with several of the Enlightenment
philosophes and decided to reform Russia. In her Instruction (1767), she criticized serfdom, the use of torture
and capital punishment, and advocated the principle of equality. Her attempts at reform failed, and her
Instruction was quickly forgotten. In fact, serfdom increased during her reign and was not abolished until
1861 by Alexander II.
12. he correct answer is A. Catherine the Great, like Peter the Great, was an expansionist tsar. She was
instrumental in the dismemberment of Poland and further expanded Russian territory to the south at the
expense of the Ottoman Empire. In the 1774 Treaty of Kuchuk-Kainarji, Russia was ceded Ottoman territory
and became the recognized protector of Greek Orthodox Christians living in Ottoman territories.
13. The correct answer is B. Frederick II the Great of Prussia was one of the most intellectual rulers of the
eighteenth century and corresponded extensively with Voltaire. However, when it came to foreign policy, he
was more traditional. He claimed, "The fundamental rule of governments is the principle of extending their
territories." He did so in two wars against Austria's Maria Theresa and seized Silesia from Austria.
14. The correct answer is A. The Bank of England was established in 1694, allowing the British
government to borrow large sums of money at low interest rates. In addition to issuing paper currency, or
banknotes, the Bank backed government bonds that paid a fixed rate of return. The creation of "public debt"
allowed Britain to raise large sums of capital to finance government activities without incurring prohibitively
high interest expenses.
15. The correct answer is C. In the eighteenth century, England led the Agricultural Revolution. New
techniques, crops, and land use practices dramatically increased farm yields. Agriculturalists discovered that
the use of crops such as turnips or clover could increase nitrogen in the soil, thereby increasing productivity.
Parliament passed the Enclosure Acts that led to the formation of larger and more productive estates by
combining many small farms. These improvements made more food available to England's population on the
eve of the age of industrialization and urbanization.
16. The correct answer is B. Textiles were the most important European industry of the eighteenth century.
Before the Industrial Revolution, rural workers produced textiles using such tools as distaffs, spindles, and 
ANSWER KEY
17. The correct answer is D. Aristotle was a Greek philosopher of the fourth century BCE, Galen was a
Greek physician of the second century CE, Claudius Ptolemy was an astronomer of the second century CE,
and Archimedes was a scientist and mathematician from the third century BCE. All would have been
influential in the Middle Ages. However, Marie Curie could not have been, inasmuch as she worked in the
twentieth century.
18. The correct answer is B. Galileo used his telescope to discover that other bodies of the universe were
composed of substances similar to those making up the earth. Traditional theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy
held that heavenly bodies were perfect and composed of a nonmaterial and incorruptible essence.
19. The correct answer is C. Late medieval medical theory was dominated by the ideas of Galen, a secondcentury CE Greek physician. His influence in anatomy, physiology, disease theories, and medical practices
was profound. However, because Galen practiced dissection on animals rather than humans, his theories of
human anatomy were often incorrect.
20. The correct answer is B. William Harvey's On the Motion of the Heart and Blood, published in 1628,
refuted Galen's contention that the liver was the beginning point in the circulation of blood. Harvey
accurately observed that it was the heart that was the starting point and that blood makes a complete circuit as
it passes through the body's veins and arteries.
21. The correct answer is A. In 1619, Descartes first proposed that the world could be understood using the
same principles as those inherent in mathematics. He fully developed his groundbreaking theories in
Discourse on Method, 1637.
22. The correct answer is B. Benedict de Spinoza was a pantheist who believed that God was the universe,
not just the creator of the universe. Human beings were not separate from God, but were a part of God and
nature. Spinoza believed that when people misunderstood the all-inclusiveness of God, they separated God
from nature and used nature for their own self-interest without respect for the divinity of all creation.
23. The correct answer is B. Isaac Newton, who created mechanistic and orderly explanations for a number
of physical phenomena, was a key figure of the Scientific Revolution. The clarity and power of his reasoning
inspired others to search for natural laws in other fields, including society, economics, politics, economics,
justice, religion, and the arts.
24. The correct answer is A. Intellectuals in the Enlightenment were known by the French term
philosophes, although not all were French or formal philosophers. Most philosophes were either middle class
or members of the aristocracy, and they shared a desire to change the world by applying the lessons learned
through rational criticism of the existing political and religious institutions and practices.
25. The correct answer is D. Paris was the recognized capital of the Enlightenment. Many of the leading
figures of the Enlightenment were French, including Voltaire, Montesquieu, Diderot, and Rousseau.
However, Kant was German, and the intellectual fathers of the Enlightenment, Locke and Newton, were
British, as were the historian Gibbon and the philosopher Hume. 
ANSWER KEY
26. The correct answer is B. The Scientific Revolution was a major turning point in Western history. The
discoveries of Galileo, Copernicus, and Newton removed the earth from the center of the universe and
demonstrated that the movement of a falling apple and the rotations of the planets could be explained using
mathematical laws. This break with the past weakened the influence of religion and heralded the emergence
of a more secular society and the quest to discover natural laws governing nearly every aspect of human
endeavor.
27. The correct answer is B. Denis Diderot's major contribution to the Enlightenment was his twenty-eight
volume Encyclopedia, or Classified Dictionary of the Sciences, Arts, and Trades. The Encyclopedia included
articles by many of the philosophes, who attacked religious superstition and urged social, legal, and political
reforms. The philosophes hoped to build a society that was more humane, tolerant, cosmopolitan, and based
on reason.
28. The correct answer is A. Deism was an outgrowth of Newton's world-machine. Deism posited that
there was a mechanical universe created by God to operate according to mathematical and scientific laws. A
number of enlightenment figures embraced the rationality of Deism and rejected traditional religion,
including Christianity, which they claimed was irrational and based upon superstition.
29. The correct answer is C. In The Social Contract, Jean Jacques Rousseau argued that government was a
necessary evil, created to preserve private property. Individuals came together to form a social contract and
agree to be governed by the general will. Since only the general will can lead to happiness for all, an
individual cannot be allowed to follow his narrow self-interest. In Rousseau's definition, freedom is obeying
the laws that one has imposed on oneself by accepting the social contract.
30. The correct answer is D. The musical forms of the concerto, symphony, and opera all reached their
zenith in the musical compositions of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. A child prodigy, Mozart perfected the
Italian comic opera in The Marriage of Figaro, which ranks with his The Magic Flute and Don Giovanni as
one of the world's greatest operas.
31. The correct answer is A. Latin was the international language of eighteenth-century European elite
scientists, philosophers, poets, dramatists, and other intellectuals. However, the expansion of book publishing
revolutionized European high culture, as the use of national languages produced an increase in the exchange
of ideas between elites and the new reading public of the middle class.
32. The correct answer is A. Punishments for crime in the eighteenth century were cruel and gruesome.
Torture was common, and courts used the rack and thumbscrew to obtain confessions. Executions were
usually carried out in public, supposedly as a deterrent to others, but the masses came for the spectacle itself.
In 1800, there were over two hundred crimes in England that were subject to the death penalty, and public
hangings continued in London until the late nineteenth century.
33. The correct answer is D. The established churches of the eighteenth century offered followers little
spiritual reward. In England, John Wesley took religion to the masses by preaching in open fields and public
spaces. He was a charismatic speaker who appealed to the lower classes, whose religious needs had been
ignored by the Anglican elite. Wesley's Methodism remained a part of the Anglican Church until long after
his death. 
ANSWER KEY
34. The correct answer is A. Economic and military assistance provided by France and other European
nations were a crucial factor in the American fight for independence. Frenchmen served as officers in
Washington's army, and a French fleet prohibited British reinforcements from reaching the battlefield at the
crucial Battle of Yorktown in 1781. Europeans supported America to advance their own strategic interests
against Britain, not because of an admiration for American democratic ideals.
35. The correct answer is D. The American Revolution showed Europeans that the ideas of the
Enlightenment could be implemented successfully to form a new society. The Declaration of Independence
expressed the Enlightenment concept of natural rights, while the Articles of Confederation and the
Constitution were social contracts established in a real political context.
36. The correct answer is A. The French economy grew well during the second half of the eighteenth
century, despite bad harvests in 1787 and 1788 that led to food shortages. In contrast, the French government
fell deep into debt after costly wars and royal extravagances. After trying to borrow its way to solvency, the
government reluctantly admitted that additional taxes were necessary. The institution of new taxes required
the consent of the Estates-General, which assembled at Versailles in the spring of 1789. Arguments over the
makeup of the Estates-General lead directly to the outbreak of the French Revolution.
37. The correct answer is E. Although the American Revolution had considerable influence in Europe and
in France, the French Revolution was more violent (e.g., the execution of Louis XVI and the Terror of 1793–
1794); more radical (e.g., full male democracy, the worship of pure reason, and the revolutionary calendar);
and more influential, both in Europe and the rest of the world, as a model of revolution (e.g., Russian
Revolution of 1917 and the Chinese Communist Revolution of 1946–1949).
38. The correct answer is D. When the Estates-General assembled at Versailles in May 1789, members
immediately disagreed over what voting procedure to follow. The First Estate (clergy) and the Second Estate
(nobility) each had 300 representatives. The Third Estate (the vast majority of the population) had 600
representatives. Voting by Estate would allow the privileged estates to out-vote the Third Estate. However,
voting by head might grant the Third Estate victory if a few sympathetic nobles would help them obtain
control. When disagreements over voting resulted in deadlock, the Third Estate declared itself to be the
National Assembly.
39. The correct answer is B. The number of poor in France in the late eighteenth century is estimated at
being about one third of the total population. Poor harvests in 1787 and 1788 and subsequent food shortages
dramatically increased the number of poor and produced a crisis by the eve of the revolution.
40. The correct answer is B. The upheavals of the French Revolution led to new liberal and national
political ideals most famously expressed in the slogan, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!" The slogan
incorporates Enlightenment commitments to liberty and equality with the emerging fraternity of nationalism.
In significant ways, the French Revolution laid the foundations for modern nationalism.
41. The correct answer is B. The Bastille was an old medieval fortress in Paris. At the time of the
revolution, it served as a royal armory and a government prison. Rumors of events at Versailles and the callup of troops inflamed much of the Paris populace. On July 14, 1789, they surrounded the Bastille, seeking
weapons, but also with the intent of releasing the many political prisoners they believed were being held 
ANSWER KEY
42. The correct answer is C. The Catholic Church was a symbol of the Old Regime and therefore very
unpopular among many of the revolutionaries. Revolutionaries confiscated Church property to remedy
economic problems inherited from the monarchy. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy granted the people the
right to elect Church bishops and priests and authorized them to receive a government salary. The clergy were
also required to swear an oath of allegiance to the new civil constitution. Many of the clergy, including the
pope, objected vehemently, leading to a counterrevolutionary movement in France.
43. The correct answer is E. Although revolutionary ideals were supposed to give France victory against its
foreign royalist enemies, by 1793 French armies suffered defeats and a foreign coalition was poised to invade
France. In August 1793, the Committee of Public Safety ordered the universal mobilization of the French
populace. In just over a year, the French army numbered 1,169,000 soldiers. The people's government had
brought forth a new people's army that fought for France itself, not just for a king or a royal dynasty. This
new conception of the nation-state marked the birth of modern nationalism.
44. The correct answer is C. In January 1793, Louis XVI was publicly executed in Paris by use of the new
enlightened method of execution, the guillotine. By that date, Louis had already lost his throne when France
abolished the monarchy and established a republic. England's Charles I was beheaded by an axe, and James II
went into exile. Louis XV died of natural causes, and in 1914 Archduke Francis Ferdinand was shot in
Sarajevo.
45. The correct answer is A. Napoleon was an outsider born on the island of Corsica and would never have
achieved high rank or status in France under the royalist regime. The revolution made Napoleon's career
possible. Beginning in 1792, he rose quickly through the ranks of the French army, becoming a brigadier
general in 1794 when he was only twenty-five. In 1796, he commanded the French armies in Italy, where he
defeated the Austrians. By 1797, Napoleon had become a hero because of his military victories. A few years
later, he became the emperor of France.
46. The correct answer is C. Although Napoleon was still at war with Britain and needed to maintain order
in conquered countries, his rule reflected the ideals of the Revolution and the Enlightenment. Legal equality,
religious toleration, and economic freedoms were incorporated into his imperial rule. He did not use brutal
suppression to control the populations of the countries he conquered.
47. The correct answer is E. Prince Klemens von Metternich, the Austrian foreign minister, was the key
figure at the Congress of Vienna that ended the Napoleonic wars. Metternich promoted the principle of
legitimacy to restore monarchies and protect religion. Metternich understood that the monarchs of Europe
shared a common interest in stability following the upheavals brought on by the French Revolution. He
created the Quadruple Alliance and the congress system to reestablish and maintain stability.
48. The correct answer is C. The Industrial Revolution in Britain was inspired by entrepreneurs who sought
out and applied new manufacturing methods and technologies. The water frame, Crompton's mule, power
looms, and the steam engine powered the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain. Cottage industry did not fail,
but it was superseded by new equipment and factories. France and Holland industrialized after the British.
Cotton was an import to Britain, but it was not grown domestically. 
ANSWER KEY
49. The correct answer is B. The problem of water seepage deep in British coalmines spurred on the
invention of the steam engine. Horse-drawn mechanical pumps were first used, but the need for more
efficient pumps led Thomas Newcomen to invent the steam pump in 1712.
50. The correct answer is B. Britain was fortunate to have considerable iron and coal deposits. Without iron
and coal, Britain would probably not have become the world's first industrialized nation. Coal in particular
was crucial to the powering of the steam engine. Coal played the pivotal role in the economies of the First
Industrial Revolution that oil plays today.
51. The correct answer is B. The replacement of cottage industries by industrial factories radically changed
workers' lives. Unlike the cottage industry system, where workers owned all the tools and equipment used for
production, factory workers used the firms' equipment and sold only their labor to factory owners. Low
wages, long hours, and difficult and dangerous working conditions were the norm. The cyclical boom-bust
economic cycles produced periodic unemployment that workers were forced to weather without
unemployment insurance or other benefits.
52. The correct answer is E. Industrialization began on the continent first in Belgium and Germany, along
with France. By 1850, only Belgium and Germany had completed the major parts of their railroad systems
that integrated their growing industrial economies. Eastern and southern Europe lagged behind northern and
western Europe. At the end of the nineteenth century, Imperial Russia was still less industrialized than the
West.
53. The correct answer is A. Even France, the continental leader in cotton manufacturing, lagged far behind
Great Britain. In 1849, French mills used 64,000 tons of raw cotton, far less than the British cotton industry,
which transformed 286,000 tons of raw cotton into cotton cloth and other goods.
54. The correct answer is B. The nineteenth-century increase in European population was due primarily to
improved food supplies that virtually eliminated famine. Medical advances and improved sanitation also
reduced disease deaths, and there were fewer major wars than in previous centuries. Birthrates had actually
begun to decline after 1790.
55. The correct answer is B. An urban explosion took place in the nineteenth century, largely as a
consequence of the Industrial Revolution. The working poor, or the factory laborers, inhabited the center of
burgeoning industrial cities. Middle-class citizens moved to the suburbs to distance themselves from the
resulting urban pollution and poverty. They settled in suburban rings surrounding the cities where they could
have individual homes and gardens.
56. The correct answer is D. Gustave Dore published a series of illustrations of mid-nineteenth-century
London. His book portrayed all of London society from the wealthy West End to the poverty stricken East
End. This picture shows the crowded and disease-ridden slums of industrial London where the streets were
filled with garbage and human waste.
57. The correct answer is B. The Luddites, led by a mythical "King Ludd" or "Ned Ludd", were skilled
English craftsmen, mostly from the cotton cloth trade. In 1812, they destroyed the factories and machines
they believed were threatening their livelihoods. The term "Luddite" is now used to describe anyone who is 
ANSWER KEY
58. The correct answer is C. European intervention by France, Britain, and Russia helped the Greeks to
regain their freedom from the Ottomans in 1829. In the early nineteenth century, a revival of Greek national
sentiment sought to end centuries of Ottoman occupation. Many Europeans felt sympathy for the Greeks,
because they were Christian and out of respect for ancient Greek civilization.
59. The correct answer is B. Alexander I (1800–1825) was raised to believe in Enlightenment ideals and
began his reign as a reformer, relaxing censorship and improving the educational system. However, he
became more reactionary after the defeat of Napoleon and refused to approve a constitution freeing the serfs.
Following his death, a number of military officials, the Decembrists, launched a failed attempted to establish
a Russian constitutional monarchy in Russia.
60. The correct answer is B. The industrial middle class warmly embraced the ideals of nineteenth-century
liberalism. It emphasized individual political and economic freedoms and the laissez-faire policies of limited
government. Liberals also advocated legal equality, freedom of speech and the press, and written
constitutions. However, liberals of the nineteenth century were not democrats and believed full political
rights should be extended only to individuals who met strict requirements of property ownership.
61. The correct answer is B. The upper middle class benefited the most from the Reform Bill of 1832. The
landed classes had dominated Britain's parliament since the Middle Ages. However, new wealth of the rising
industrial middle class led to greater political aspirations. The tensions between the two propertied groups
peaked in 1832. The Reform Act caused land owners to lose a few safe seats in the House of Commons,
while a number of new towns and cities received representation for the first time. However, property
qualifications made sure that the number of voters only increased from 478,000 to about 814,000, meaning
that just over 10 percent of the adult male population of Britain could vote.
62. The correct answer is C. The German Confederation's Frankfurt Assembly was dominated by educated
middle-class delegates who were professors, lawyers, journalists, and bureaucrats. Many were also
nationalists who wanted a single unified German state. When the assembly offered the title of "Emperor of
the Germans" to Prussia's William Frederick IV, he turned it down and ordered the Prussian delegates to
return home. The assembly soon disbanded, failing in its attempt to create a united Germany.
63. The correct answer is A. Prison reform and professional police forces of the nineteenth century were
geared toward the creation of a more disciplined society. Extensive and excessive use of capital punishment
had proved ineffective. Greater emphasis was placed upon incarceration, although the debate continued over
whether prisons should only punish or also rehabilitate inmates.
64. The correct answer is B. Sentiment and individualism formed the keystone of the Romantic movement,
and Romantics considered poetry to be the most important form of literary expression. They claimed that
Poetry allowed the direct expression of one's soul, revealing a hidden and invisible world to others. The most
prominent English Romantic poets were Percy Bysshe Shelley, Lord Byron, John Keats, and William
Wordsworth.
65. The correct answer is B. Like many Romantic artists, J.M.W. Turner turned to nature for his subjects.
However, where many Romantic artists included realistic detail in their works, Turner anticipated later 
ANSWER KEY
66. The correct answer is E. Napoleon III, like his uncle, Napoleon Bonaparte, was an authoritarian ruler.
His did not accept the economic ideology from nineteenth-century liberalism that emphasized laissez-faire
policies. Instead, Napoleon III used government resources to stimulate the French economy and to promote
industrial growth. The most famous example of his activist government policy was the rebuilding of Paris
under the direction of Baron Haussmann.
67. The correct answer is B. In 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi invaded Sicily with an army of a thousand Red
Shirt volunteers. Garibaldi, a former supporter of Giuseppe Mazini and the Young Italy Movement, soon
gained control of Sicily. Moving to the Italian mainland, he quickly conquered the Kingdom of the Two
Sicilies. Although Garibaldi favored a republic, he allowed Count Cavour, prime minister of Piedmont, to
establish the kingdom of Italy under Piedmont's Victor Emmanuel II in 1861.
68. The correct answer is B. Prussia's King William I wished to expand and modernize Prussia's military.
When Prussia's parliament, led by middle-class liberals fearful of Prussian militarism, blocked the
government's military budget in 1862, William I appointed Otto von Bismarck as prime minister. Bismarck
attempted to get parliament to reverse its decision, but was refused. So, he bypassed Parliament to collect
taxes and reorganized the army without their approval.
69. The correct answer is D. In the nineteenth century, ethnic nationalism was endemic in the German-run
Austrian Empire, particularly in Hungary. Following Austria's defeat by Prussia in the Austro-Prussian War
of 1866, German Austrians negotiated the 1867 Ausgleich, or Compromise, with the Hungarians creating the
dual monarchy of Austria and Hungary. Each state had its own legislature, domestic government, and capital
(Vienna for Austria and Budapest for Hungary), and were united under a single Habsburg monarch, Francis
Joseph.
70. The correct answer is A. Karl Marx adopted Hegel's conception of the dialectic and applied it to the
study of economic and social history. Hegel's dialectic posited that all change resulted from a conflict
between opposing and antagonistic elements. Marx did not share Hegel's belief that history was determined
by ideas that manifested themselves in historical forces. Marx's dialectical materialism assumed that an
interaction between opposing and antagonistic material forces determined the course of history. Marx argued
that the course of history would be determined through a class struggle between those who had property and
those who did not.
71. The correct answer is C. Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection
exhaustively cataloged numerous plants and animals that had evolved over a long period of time from earlier
and simpler forms of life. Darwin theorized that some organisms living in the highly competitive natural
world were more fit than others to survive and reproduce. Since only the "fittest" would survive, their
offspring and the traits they carried would dominate subsequent generations. In The Descent of Man, 1871,
Darwin argued that humanity was also part of the evolutionary process.
72. The correct answer is B. The dominant artistic and literary movement of the 1850s and 1860s was
Realism. Realists rejected the larger-than-life characters and unusual settings of Romanticism, aiming instead 
ANSWER KEY
73. The correct answer is D. By the early twentieth century, Germany had begun to replace Britain as
Europe's leading industrial power on the strength of new manufactures such as chemical and heavy electrical
machinery. German laboratories produced higher-quality artificial chemical dyes and photographic supplies.
By 1910, the Germany produced twice as much steel as Britain did.
74. The correct answer is B. Germany processed some of the most powerful labor unions of the nineteenth
century. Although trade unions first developed in Great Britain, German unions quickly became very
powerful. By 1914, the German trade union movement was the second largest in Europe. In Germany, about
85 percent of union workers were members of socialist political parties.
75. The correct answer is A. By the beginning of the twentieth century, most primary-level educational
systems throughout Europe were free and compulsory. Mass education was a product of the mass society that
evolved from the urban and industrial revolutions. The chief motive for mass education was political. The
increasingly democratic states of Western Europe desired educated voters, and all European nations used
education to instill patriotic and nationalistic attitudes.
76. The correct answer is A. France's defeat by Germany in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871 ended
Louis Napoleon's Second Empire. Napoleon III abdicated and obtained exile in England. Some French
wished to establish a monarchy after the fall of the Second Empire, but others desired a republic. Finally, in
1875 an improvised constitution was adopted that established a republican government, France's Third
Republic (the first two were established in 1792 and 1848).
77. The correct answer is A. One of the key reasons that the Germans supplanted the British as the
industrial leader of Europe was that the British, unlike the Germans, were unwilling to encourage formal
scientific and technical education. In addition, the British were suspicious of innovation and reluctant to
invest in new industries and new technologies.
78. The correct answer is C. On the eve of World War I, the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary still faced
the unresolved nationality demons that had long disturbed the empire. Ethnic Germans felt threatened outside
of Austria, and the Czechs, Poles, and others still retained their own nationalistic and ethnic aspirations to
govern themselves. World War I would end in the breakup of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the
emergence of several ethnic-based states in Eastern Europe.
79. The correct answer is E. Max Planck's quantum theory of energy raised fundamental questions about
the subatomic structure of the atom. By 1900, the traditional view that the atom was the basic building block
of the material world was being seriously challenged. Newtonian physics could no longer resolve all of the
scientific issues of the universe.
80. The correct answer is A. Social Darwinism, which developed in the late nineteenth century, represented
an attempt to apply Darwin's theories of organic evolution to the study of society at large. The most
prominent of the Social Darwinists was Herbert Spencer, who claimed that societies were organisms that
ANSWER KEY
81. The correct answer is D. The scientist Marie Curie is known for her work with radiation. She shared the
Nobel Prize with two others for her research with radiation and won another Nobel Prize later for her work
with the element radium.
82. The correct answer is C. Prior to World War, I Emmeline Pankhurst led a radical women's suffrage
movement in England. In 1903, she established the Women's Social and Political Union with the help of her
daughters Christabel and Sylvia. Pankhurst and her supporters, known as "suffragettes," pelted politicians and
government officials with eggs and vegetables, smashed windows of fashionable department stores, chained
themselves to lamp posts, and went on hunger strikes in jail to dramatize their cause. Although the suffragette
campaign ended with the start of World War I, British women gained the vote after the war.
83. The correct answer is A. In 1896, Theodor Herzl published A Jewish State in which he stated that "the
Jews who wish it will have their state" in Palestine. However, Palestine was a part of the Ottoman Empire at
that time, and the Ottomans were opposed to Jewish immigration to Palestine. In 1917, the British Foreign
Secretary, Arthur James Balfour, sent a letter to the Jewish leader Lord Rothschild expressing support for a
"national home for the Jewish people" to be located in Palestine. This letter, later known as the Balfour
Declaration, formed the basis for the modern state of Israel. Following the end of World War I, the Ottoman
Empire had dissolved and there was a wave of Jewish immigration to Palestine during the interwar years.
84. The correct answer is E. Paul Cezanne's Woman with Coffee Pot is an example of Post-Impressionism
in painting. Post-Impressionists tried to present their inner feelings and perceptions of reality in their painting,
while Impressionists sought to portray the changing effects of light on objects. In this painting, Cezanne
relates the geometric shape of the woman with the geometric shapes of the coffeepot and rectangular door
panels.
85. The correct answer is E. The Boer War was fought in South Africa between the British and the Boers,
Afrikaner descendents of seventeenth-century Dutch settlers. Cecil Rhodes and other imperialists pushed
Britain to war when gold and diamonds were discovered on Boer lands. The Boer War lasted from 1899 to
1902; the British defeated the Boers at a considerable cost in blood and treasure.
86. The correct answer is D. After the Franco-Prussian War lead to the unification of Germany, Bismarck
feared France would seek revenge and the return of the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine. Bismarck created a
series of alliances to forestall French retribution. The Triple Alliance included Germany, Italy, and AustriaHungary, although when World War I began in 1914, Italy chose not to join Germany and Austria-Hungary.
87. The correct answer is A. In the early twentieth century, Serbs and the Austrians struggled for
dominance in the Balkans. The decline of the Ottoman Empire in the nineteenth century created a vacuum in
the Balkans. The Austrians expanded into the region, but Serbia, a Slavic state allied with Russia, wanted to
establish a Greater Serbia. The conflicting ambitions of Austria and Serbia ultimately led to World War I.
88. The correct answer is C. The painting Les Demoiselles d'Avignon by Pablo Picasso is considered to be 
ANSWER KEY
89. The correct answer is A. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the future seemed bright to
most Europeans. They expected material progress to create an "earthly paradise," and there was a widespread
belief that science and technology would solve all challenges facing society, including war. Before the
outbreak of World War I, occasional wars were kept localized and mitigated through diplomatic actions.
90. The correct answer is C. The Schlieffen Plan called for a rapid German invasion of France through
neutral Belgium before turning to fight Russia. The plan was based on the well-founded belief that Russia
would take longer to mobilize its military resources. The Schlieffen Plan was dependent on surprise and rapid
mobilization, making it more likely that Germany would respond with automatic military action in an
international crisis, rather than allowing slow diplomacy to resolve a crisis.
91. The correct answer is A. The Austrian government seized upon the assassination of Archduke Francis
Ferdinand in Sarajevo to thwart Serbia's Balkan ambitions. Austria blamed the assassination on Serbia but,
fearing Russia would support their fellow Slavs, sought support from Germany. The German emperor,
William II, gave the Austrians an unconditional promise of "full support." Armed with German support,
Austria placed upon Serbia excessive demands that increased the likelihood of war.
92. The correct answer is B. Most Europeans believed that the Great War would be over in a few weeks, or
months, and supported their government's decision to go to war. Many also believed that the world's
complicated industrial economy necessitated a brief war.
93. The correct answer is B. The development of trench warfare was unexpected by the generals, and the
only plan that they could devise was to launch a long artillery bombardment to flatten the opponent's barbed
wire and leave the enemy in a state of disorientation and confusion. After "softening up" the enemy, a frontal
infantry assault would be made across no man's land. The tactic invariably failed, given the strength of
opposing machine guns. The cost was millions of lives.
94. The correct answer is A. On April 1917, the United States joined Britain and France in World War I, in
reaction to the unrestricted German submarine warfare. America's entry gave the Allies an immediate
psychological boost, particularly important after the difficult year Britain and France experienced in 1917.
Although, American troops did not reach Europe in large numbers until 1918, they participated in several
crucial battles that led to Germany's defeat.
95. The correct answer is A. When World War I began in August 1914, the Triple Alliance consisted of
Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. However, Italy refused to join the Central Powers and entered the war
on the side of Britain and France. In 1914, the Ottoman Empire joined with Germany and Austria-Hungary,
partially because of Russian and British threats to Ottoman territories.
96. The correct answer is A. By necessity, women played a major economic role in World War I, replacing
male workers who were in the military. However, they received lower wages than men and often lost their
jobs at war's end as soldiers returned to their old jobs. However, participation in the war effort helped women
to gain the vote. British women gained the vote in January 1918, with German and Austrian women 
ANSWER KEY
97. The correct answer is A. When World War I began, Russia was not prepared. Although it had the
largest population in Europe and could provide enough soldiers for its armies, Russia lacked modern
armaments and military leaders, and was governed by the inept Tsar Nicholas II. By early 1917, the Russian
army had suffered three million dead and eight million total casualties.
98. The correct answer is C. After the Bolsheviks seized power in November 1917, Lenin nationalized all
land and gave it to rural soviets. This ratified past peasant land seizures and assured that peasants would
continue to support the Bolsheviks against their former landlords. The Duma was quickly dismissed, and
Lenin withdrew Russia from the war against Germany in early 1918 as civil war broke out between the Reds
and Whites.
99. The correct answer is C. When the Austro-Hungarian Empire disintegrated after World War I, several
new states emerged from its wreckage, including Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia. Poland had
disappeared from the maps of Europe in the eighteenth century but was reconstituted after the war from
mostly Russian but also German territory.
100. The correct answer is C. The Treaty of Versailles included Article 231, the so-called War Guilt
Clause, which required that Germany accept responsibility for starting World War I. Since Germany was
responsible for starting the war, it was obligated to pay reparations for war damage. Most Germans
considered the Versailles Treaty to be unfair, and during the 1920s and 1930s, it was used by Adolph Hitler
to rally political support.
101. The correct answer is C. In 1922, the German government faced enormous economic difficulties and
could no longer pay war reparations. France responded by occupying the Ruhr valley and seizing mines and
factories in compensation. The German government responded by printing more money, causing
hyperinflation, economic collapse, and the worthless currency shown in the photograph.
102. The correct answer is B. Much of Europe's prosperity between 1924 and 1929 rested on massive loans
made to Germany by American banks under the Dawes Plan. American private loans helped to stabilize the
German economy and enabled Germany to make its war reparation payments. The crash of the American
stock market in October 1929 caused panicky American investors to withdraw their loans and investments in
Europe, causing European economies to collapse like a house of cards.
103. The correct answer is D. Although Mussolini's repressive fascist dictatorship used propaganda and
created numerous fascist organizations, it never achieved the degree of totalitarian control found in Soviet
Russia or Nazi Germany. The armed forces, Church, monarchy, and other pre-fascist organizations were
never fully absorbed into the Fascist state, and workers and peasants were largely left alone. Mussolini also
granted the Catholic Church its own sovereign territory in the heart of Rome—Vatican City.
104. The correct answer is B. Hitler wrote his autobiography Mein Kampf, or My Struggle, while in prison
for the failed Beer Hall Putsch of November 1923. Hitler described his early years in Vienna and the sources
of his ideologies of extreme German nationalism, anti-Semitism, racism, and anticommunism. Hitler wed
these extremist views to social Darwinist theory arguing that Germany was the world's most fit nation and
that the Aryans were the fittest race. 
ANSWER KEY
105. The correct answer is B. The photograph shows a boy cleaning up broken glass and other debris in
Berlin the morning after Kristallnacht in November 1938. The Nazi-inspired rampage against German Jews
destroyed thousands of Jewish businesses, killed over one hundred Jews, and sent thirty thousand more to
concentration camps.
106. The correct answer is B. By the beginning of the 1930s, the only remaining Eastern Europe
parliamentary democracy was Czechoslovakia. In the 1920s, several states in Eastern Europe shifted to
authoritarian governments. A military regime took power in Poland in 1925 and royal dictatorships were
imposed in Bulgaria (1923) and Yugoslavia (1929).
107. The correct answer is A. Stalin's collectivization policy eliminated private farms and moved farming
families onto large collective farms. The peasants resisted by hoarding crops and slaughtering their livestock,
causing a massive famine. By 1934, 26 million family farms were consolidated into 250,000 collectives, and
10 million peasants had died from the government-created famine.
108. The correct answer is B. Surrealism was an important artistic movement of the interwar years.
Surrealists sought to express a reality that went beyond the material world of the senses. Their paintings were
often inspired by the world of the Freudian unconscious: dreams, nightmares, and fantasies. The most famous
of the Surrealist painters was Salvador Dali, known for using recognizable objects removed from their normal
context, such as the melting timepieces of The Persistence of Memory.
109. The correct answer is A. The revolution in physics begun by Einstein and Planck continued into the
interwar years. In classical Newtonian physics, it was believed that all phenomena could be predicted if the
appropriate variables could be measured. Walter Heisenberg disagreed with such predictability. No one could
determine the path of an electron because the very act of observing the electron with light affected the
electron's location. Heisenberg undermined confidence in the predictability of physics by proposing that
uncertainty existed at some level of all physical laws.
110. The correct answer is C. In 1938, Hitler threatened war unless Czechoslovakia ceded the largely
ethnic German territory of the Sudetenland to Germany. At Munich, in September, the British Prime
Minister, Neville Chamberlain, and the French Premier, agreed to all of Hitler's demands. In order to avoid
war, Britain and France resorted to what became known as a strategy of "appeasement," or giving in to all
demands. When Chamberlain returned to England, he claimed the agreement guaranteed "peace for our
time." Winston Churchill, however, called the Munich agreement "a disaster of the first magnitude."
111. The correct answer is E. On September 1, 1939, Nazi Germany invaded Poland, using Blitzkrieg, or
"lightening war" tactics. France and Britain declared war against Germany on September 3, but they did not
take the offensive militarily, hoping instead that attrition and an economic blockade might prevent further
military action by Hitler. The waiting of the winter of 1939–1940 was referred to as the "phony war." Hitler
resumed the offensive in the West in April, and by the end of June most of the nations of Western Europe,
except Britain, had fallen under the Nazi yoke.
112. The correct answer is A. Japan had risen become a world power in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century by defeating China and Russia. By the early 1930s, Japan was experiencing internal
tensions resulting from an expanding population (from 30 million in 1870 to 80 million by 1937) and a severe 
ANSWER KEY
113. The correct answer is A. Hitler's "Final Solution" to the Jewish problem called for the extermination
of all Jews. At the beginning of 1939, Nazi policy promoted the "emigration" of German Jews out of
Germany. With the onset of war in September, it was suggested that all Jews be shipped to the island of
Madagascar, off the east coast of Africa. Instead, the decision was made to exterminate the Jews, first by
death squads, and then in specially constructed death camps such as Auschwitz-Birkenau, using ovens,
poison gas, and other industrialized methods of mass murder.
114. The correct answer is D. The official reason for dropping atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki
in August 1945 was to save both American and Japanese lives. President Harry Truman and his advisors
feared that an invasion of the Japanese home islands by American forces could cost a million American lives.
115. The correct answer is C. As World War II came to an end, the Allies began to disagree about the
future of Europe and the world. One of the areas of greatest disagreement was over the future of the Eastern
European countries. The United States and Great Britain advocated self-determination and democracy for the
newly liberated states, but the Soviet Union's Stalin demanded the creation of Soviet-friendly buffer states
against the possibility of Western attack.
116. The correct answer is C. In 1951, France, West Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, and
Italy established the European Coal and Steel Community with the aim of creating a common market for
those two items by eliminating trade barriers. In 1957, those same nations created the European Economic
Community (EEC), known as the Common Market. Established for economic reasons, the Common Market
eliminated trade barriers between the nations and created a large free-trade area.
117. The correct answer is C. Ronald Reagan, a fervent anticommunist, was elected president of the United
States in 1980. Early in his administration, Reagan referred to the Soviet Union as an "evil empire" and began
an arms buildup and reignited the arms race between the two superpowers. One of his major efforts was the
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), also known as "Star Wars," which was designed to destroy incoming
ballistic missiles.
118. The correct answer is E. Under the presidential administrations of Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, the
United States suffered a severe economic stagnation. The crisis was caused by a 400% increase in oil prices
by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Uncharacteristically, high inflation combined
with high unemployment to produce the new economic phenomenon known as "stagflation."
119. The correct answer is D. Existentialism was the result of two world wars and the consequent
breakdown of traditional values. Post-World War II existentialism was best expressed by the French authors
Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre. They argued that in a universe without God, humans had no preordained
destiny and struggled to find meaning alone. Life was without transcendental meaning or purpose. Faced with
despair and depression, Camus believed humans could find salvation only in themselves and let their own
actions define themselves: "man is nothing else but what he makes of himself."
120. The correct answer is D. Popular unrest and an economic decline led to mass demonstrations in
Communist East Germany and to sympathy demonstrations in West Germany. Bowing to the inevitable, the 
ANSWER KEY
CLEP Western Civilization II
ANSWER KEY - Page 47
East German government opened the entire border with the West. The Berlin Wall, the most famous symbol
of the Cold War, "fell" to democracy and a massive celebration ensued. The infamous wall was demolished
into millions of pieces that became souvenirs. 


