1. The noble revolts known as the Fronde resulted in
(A) the assassination of Cardinal Mazarin in 1661
(B) renewed power for the Parliament of Paris
(C) a unified noble army securing and increasing its own power
(D) French citizens turning to the monarchy for stability
(E) the establishment of Catholicism as France’s only legal religion


2. The economic policies of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Louis XIV’s controller general of finances,
(A) were noted for their innovation and originality
(B) used new accounting practices to lessen the tax burden on the peasants
(C) were based on mercantilism and stressed state benefits from government regulation of the
economy
(D) gave Louis the large treasury surplus he needed to make war
(E) led to a policy of peace instead of war because of the latter’s great economic costs


3. The War of the Spanish Succession was effectively concluded with the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, which
(A) gave the French king control of Spanish territories
(B) gave France control over the Spanish Netherlands, Naples, and Milan
(C) drove the Bourbons from Spain
(D) destroyed the European balance of power
(E) greatly benefited England, a strong naval power


4. During the reign of Philip IV, Spain
(A) suffered under the misrule of the Duke of Lerma
(B) won back its European possessions in the Thirty Years’ War
(C) received a respite from the civil wars and internal revolts common under Philip’s
predecessors
(D) failed to make any real progress, despite reforms under the count of Olivares
(E) lost most of its empire in the New World to England


5. The Austrian Empire in the seventeenth century
(A) was unified by linguistic and ethnic ties
(B) was defeated at Vienna by a Turkish army in 1687
(C) was a highly centralized, absolutist state under Leopold I
(D) lost a German empire, but gained one in Eastern Europe
(E) was successful in spreading Roman Catholicism throughout Eastern Europe, including Russia


6. The political institution known as the Sejm made seventeenth-century Poland
(A) an absolutist, monarchical state dominated by King Sigismund III
(B) a powerful militaristic machine threatening its neighbors
(C) a land without powerful nobles
(D) a constitutional monarchy, similar to that of England
(E) an impotent, decentralized state


7. The MOST significant Romanov ruler of the eighteenth century was
(A) Ivan the Terrible
(B) Nicholas III
(C) Olaf the Great
(D) Peter the Great
(E) Michael


8. The “Glorious Revolution” in 1688 in England was significant for
(A) restoring Charles II and the Stuart dynasty to power
(B) bloodlessly deposing James II in favor of William of Orange
(C) returning England to a Catholic commonwealth
(D) Parliament’s establishment of a new monarch through a series of bloody wars
(E) the separation of England from Scotland


9. Thomas Hobbes
(A) believed that a state of nature without government or social institutions best ensured human
happiness
(B) stated that mankind was animalistic and needed a strong government to maintain social order
(C) was a firm believer in representative democracy
(D) supported theocratic rule under the guidance of the Vatican
(E) declared that the institution of divine right meant that monarchy was the best form of
government


10. The artistic style represented in this illustration of Bernini’s The Ecstasy of Saint Theresa is
(A) Neo-Gothic
(B) High Renaissance
(C) Mannerist
(D) Baroque
(E) Rococo


11. In her Instruction, Catherine the Great outlined enlightened legal reforms that
(A) abolished serfdom throughout Russia
(B) established equality before the law for all Russian citizens
(C) instigated changes in the Russian government that sapped the power of the old nobility
(D) accomplished little and were soon forgotten due to heavy opposition
(E) ended capital punishment


12. Catherine the Great of Russia
(A) followed a successful policy of expansion against the Turks
(B) instigated enlightened reforms for the peasantry after the revolt of Emelyn Pugachev
(C) alienated the nobility with her extensive enlightened reforms
(D) successfully eliminated the power of the Duma
(E) was driven out of European Russia by Prussia’s Frederick the Great


13. With regard to politics, King Frederick the Great of Prussia believed that the fundamental rule of
governments is to
(A) respect new human rights
(B) expand their territories
(C) combat church fanaticism
(D) raise taxes to meet all military needs of state spending
(E) equalizing social and economic differences among its citizens


14. Which of the following financial advantages did the British government enjoy over French rulers of the
eighteenth century?
(A) Britain could borrow large sums of money at low rates of interest.
(B) The British government had a lower total amount of debt.
(C) Britain had a strong policy against state borrowing of any kind.
(D) France had no real curbs on its borrowing.
(E) Britain lacked costly colonial obligations and responsibilities.


15. Improvements in eighteenth-century European agricultural methods and practices occurred primarily in
(A) France
(B) the Netherlands
(C) Britain
(D) Russia
(E) Poland


16. Before the industrial revolution in eighteenth-century Europe, rural workers produced textiles using such
tools as spinning wheels, distaffs, and spindles. Their combined efforts came to be known as
(A) work houses
(B) cottage industries
(C) peasant piece-work shops
(D) textile factories
(E) sweatshops


17. All of these authorities were relied on by medieval scholars EXCEPT
(A) Aristotle
(B) Galen
(C) Ptolemy
(D) Curie
(E) Archimedes


18. Galileo’s observations resulted in the dramatic finding that the
(A) orbits of planets were elliptical rather than circular
(B) planets were made of materials similar to those found on Earth
(C) the solar system was much larger than previously thought
(D) the stars were smaller than previously thought
(E) Jupiter had more rings than Saturn


19. Which of the following Greco-Roman doctors had the GREATEST influence on medieval medical
thought?
(A) Hippocrates
(B) Rhazes
(C) Galen
(D) Aristotle
(E) Paracelsus


20. William Harvey’s On the Motion of the Heart and Blood refuted the idea that the
(A) immune system was governed by the pancreas
(B) liver was the beginning point of circulation of blood
(C) lymph system functioned independently
(D) traditional herbal healing methods were effective blood cleansers
(E) primary transmission of disease was through bad blood


21. Descartes believed that the world could be understood using
(A) the same principles inherent in mathematical thinking
(B) quiet contemplation of the Holy Scriptures
(C) lessons learned from mystical experiences
(D) insights gained from the interpretation of dreams
(E) an imagined tabula rasa


22. Spinoza believed that a failure to understand God led
(A) to the false worship of nature
(B) people to use nature for their own self-interest
(C) individuals to incorrectly judge the morality of others
(D) the faithful to sexual perversion
(E) to a separation of mind and body


23. Which of the following was a key figure of the Scientific Revolution who inspired the search for natural
laws in numerous fields, including sociology and economics?
(A) Galileo
(B) Newton
(C) Descartes
(D) Pascal
(E) Copernicus


24. The French philosophes
(A) were literate intellectuals who hoped to change the world using reason and rationality
(B) flourished in an atmosphere of government support
(C) sought to prevent the expansion of the Enlightenment to other states
(D) encouraged state censorship of ideas contrary to their own
(E) were academic philosophers associated with the University of Paris and other French
universities


25. Which of the following cities was the recognized capital of the Enlightenment?
(A) Geneva
(B) Berlin
(C) London
(D) Paris
(E) Rome


26. European intellectual life of the eighteenth century was marked by the emergence of
(A) anti-Semitism and greater persecution of minorities
(B) secularization and a search to find the natural laws governing human life
(C) sophism and the mockery of past traditions
(D) monastic schools and medieval modes of religious training
(E) the separation of the institutions of church and state across all of Europe


27. Diderot’s contributions to Enlightenment efforts against religious fanaticism, intolerance, and prudery is
BEST exemplified in his
(A) brilliant play “Is Rome Burning?”
(B) twenty-eight volume Encyclopedia compiling articles from numerous philosophes
(C) autobiography published in French
(D) biography of Newton, “the greatest Europe has ever known”
(E) Confessions


28. Deism was based on
(A) Newton’s conception of a rational universe following scientific laws
(B) God answering prayers directed to him in song and poetry
(C) the divinity of Jesus as son of the prime mover of the rational universe
(D) the denial of the existence of any Supreme Being
(E) the pantheism of Spinoza and other enlightened philosophers


29. In The Social Contract, Rousseau expressed his belief that
(A) government was an evil that should be eliminated
(B) an individual’s will is most important
(C) freedom is achieved by being forced to follow the “general will,” or what is best for all
(D) a child was a small adult with all the same abilities and obligations
(E) in nature, human life was “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short”


30. The illustration shows which of the following eighteenth-century composers who composed
groundbreaking concertoes, symphonies, and operas, such as The Marriage of Figaro and Don Giovanni?
(A) Johann Sebastian Bach
(B) George Frederick Handel
(C) Franz Joseph Haydn
(D) Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
(E) Ludwig van Beethoven


31. High culture in eighteenth-century Europe was influenced by the
(A) enormous impact of the book publishing industry
(B) decline of French as an international language
(C) decline of magazine circulations with the rise of the novel
(D) increased dependency of authors on wealthy patrons
(E) its exclusive focus upon religious subject matter


32. The punishment of crime in the eighteenth century was often
(A) public and very gruesome
(B) carried out by mobs after the criminals were charged in court
(C) less severe than the crime would merit
(D) the responsibility of the army
(E) reduced to probation and fines due to the influence of the churches and philosophers


33. John Wesley
(A) was responsible for the resurgence of Catholic piety
(B) supported a rationalistic approach to Protestantism
(C) spread the teachings of pietism through his Moravian Brethren
(D) created and controlled his evangelical Methodist church using revivalist techniques
(E) was a leading Deist


34. The American colonists were able win their war for independence because of
(A) generous military and financial aid from France
(B) the collapse of the English colonial system
(C) apathy of the English military
(D) flaws in the English mercantile system
(E) George III’s recognition of colonial independence 1776


35. The American Revolution had which of the following effects on Europeans?
(A) Showing that military force was the final diplomatic authority
(B) Ending colonial expansion around the world
(C) Establishing that the new United States was the most powerful nation
(D) Demonstrating that the ideas of the Enlightenment could be realized politically
(E) Revealing that mighty England could be defeated


36. Which of the following was the MOST immediate cause of the French Revolution?
(A) The government failed to resolve its debt and other economic problems.
(B) Reforms were blocked by the French Parliament.
(C) The philosophes called for radical reforms.
(D) Louis XVI’s rejected the cahiers de doléances.
(E) Peasant rioted in the countryside.


37. Compared to the American Revolution, the French Revolution was
(A) more violent
(B) more radical
(C) more influential in Europe as a model of rebellion
(D) more influential to most of the world outside Europe as a model of revolution
(E) All of the above


38. In 1789, the Estates-General
(A) was an advisory body that was often consulted by King Louis XVI
(B) unanimously agreed that only radical change could solve France’s problems
(C) was dominated by the First Estate composed mostly of urban lawyers
(D) was deeply divided over the issue of whether to vote by Estates or by head
(E) was trying to seize power from the National Assembly


39. Just prior to the Revolution in France, the number of poor people in France
(A) declined
(B) increased greatly
(C) increased slightly
(D) remained the same
(E) declined slightly


40. Which of the following slogans from the French Revolution neatly evoked the ideals of the rebellion?
(A) “Down with the aristocracy!”
(B) “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!”
(C) “Death to the king and queen!”
(D) “Kill all priests and burn all churches!”
(E) “Vive l’Empereur!”


41. The Bastille was
(A) the king’s castle
(B) an arsenal and prison
(C) the place where most state executions took place
(D) a monastery
(E) a royal palace


42. The National Assembly’s approach towards the Catholic Church was to
(A) leave the institution alone
(B) increase its power dramatically in France
(C) pass legislation to secularized the church offices and clergy
(D) ban Catholicism from France
(E) force the Church to ordain women as priests


43. During the 1790s, the army of the French Republic
(A) received little backing from the home front
(B) was small but effective in battle
(C) continued to be commanded by members of the Bourbon family
(D) was totally defeated by foreign aristocratic forces
(E) fueled modern nationalism and was raised through total mobilization of the population


44. Which of the following monarch’s head is being exhibited in the illustration?
(A) Charles I of England
(B) Louis XV of France
(C) Louis XVI of France
(D) James II of England
(E) Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria


45. Napoleon’s rapid rise to power was based on his
(A) series of stunning defeats over the enemies of France
(B) social programs that appealed to the masses
(C) promises to make France great again
(D) supporters within an inner clique of revolutionaries dedicated to the general
(E) personal charisma and his family connections to the Bourbons


46. Which of the following was NOT a factor that contributed to Napoleon’s defeat?
(A) The failure of the Continental System
(B) The defeat of the French navy at the Battle of Trafalgar
(C) The unmanageable rebellions provoked by his brutal rule over conquered countries
(D) The spread of nationalism in the conquered countries
(E) The invasion of Russia


47. Klemens von Metternich
(A) continued to incorporate revolutionary values into his government following Napoleon’s
defeat
(B) believed that a free press was necessary to maintain the status quo in Europe
(C) was a political reactionary, but believed that a republic was the best way to ensure order
(D) was anti-religious and supported atheistic causes in Eastern Europe and Russia
(E) believed European monarchs shared a common interest in promoting stability


48. The Industrial Revolution in Britain was largely inspired by
(A) an urgent need to reduce eighteenth-century poverty
(B) the failure of the cottage industry
(C) entrepreneurs who sought and accepted the new manufacturing methods of inventions
(D) the Dutch and French industrialization
(E) the availability of substantial amounts of English-grown cotton


49. The invention of the steam engine in Britain was initially triggered by
(A) the textile industry’s demand for new sources of power
(B) problems in the mining industry
(C) the railroad industry’s call for a more efficient source of power
(D) the need for a more efficient mode of power for English ships
(E) the need to replace sailing ships with steam power


50. The success of the steam engine in the Industrial Revolution made Britain dependent upon
(A) timber
(B) coal
(C) water power
(D) electricity
(E) railroads


51. The rise of the industrial factory system deeply changed the quality of life and social status of workers
who
(A) were traditionally paid in kind
(B) lost ownership of the means of production, becoming simple wage earners
(C) were less vulnerable to more rapid cycles of economic boom and bust
(D) got both good wages and many fringe benefits unknown before
(E) saw entire family units working together in factories


52. Industrialization began on the continent first in
(A) Spain and Italy
(B) Austria and Poland
(C) Russia and Sweden
(D) Norway and Denmark
(E) Belgium and Germany


53. The Industrial Revolution in continental Europe
(A) was a generation behind Britain in cotton manufacture
(B) neglected coal and iron technology in favor of the progress in the textile industry
(C) benefited from the discovery of vast coal deposits in Germany in the 1820s
(D) would remain far behind the British until the twentieth century
(E) quickly surpassed Britain’s production of cotton cloth


54. The European population explosion of the nineteenth century was
(A) the result of increased birthrates across Europe
(B) largely attributable to the disappearance of famine from much of Europe
(C) caused by a lack of emigration
(D) remarkable because of the preponderance of major epidemic diseases
(E) limited to Catholic countries


55. Industrialization produced many demographic changes and caused the
(A) landed aristocracy to move from cities to escape the ill effects of factory development
(B) new middle class to move to the suburbs of cities to escape the urban poor
(C) newly affluent laboring class to live in diverse locations
(D) rich and poor to live together more often in new suburban housing developments
(E) rich to build large mansions and palaces close to the urban seats of government


56. The illustration by the leading nineteenth-century graphic artist Gustave Dore depicts
(A) Parisian workers' housing built by Napoleon III and Georges Haussmann
(B) a late medieval city in Germany
(C) a planned utopian socialist community in Russia
(D) a London slum
(E) prosperous eighteenth-century Amsterdam with its traditional narrow houses


57. The Luddites
(A) received little support in their areas of activity
(B) destroyed industrial machines that threatened their livelihood
(C) were composed of the lowest unskilled workers in Great Britain
(D) was the first movement of working-class consciousness of the Continent
(E) were a phenomenon of continental industrialization


58. The Greek independence rebellion was successful largely because of
(A) a well-trained guerrilla army
(B) the Turks’ lack of fortitude
(C) European intervention
(D) superior Greek military tactics
(E) the superior Greeks defense of the acropolis


59. Which of the following statements about Tsar Alexander I of Russia is NOT correct?
(A) He became more reactionary following the defeat of Napoleon.
(B) He promulgated a new constitution, freeing the serfs.
(C) He reformed the Russian education system.
(D) He adopted a program of arbitrary censorship to strengthen autocratic rule.
(E) He died without an heir in 1825, leading to a dispute over who should become the next tsar.


60. Nineteenth-century liberalism was MOST warmly embraced by
(A) factory workers
(B) the industrial middle class
(C) radical aristocrats
(D) army officers
(E) large landowners


61. The 1832, British Reform Bill primarily benefited the
(A) landed aristocracy
(B) upper-middle class
(C) working class
(D) clergy
(E) formally educated


62. In 1848, the Frankfurt Assembly
(A) unanimously adopted a Grossdeutsch solution for the Germanies
(B) succeeded in making Prussia’s Frederick William IV president of a united Germany
(C) failed in its attempt to create a united Germany
(D) gained the support of Austria
(E) successfully organized a military uprising that unified all of Germany under Prussian
leadership


63. The creation of professional police forces and prison improvements were geared toward
(A) the creation of more disciplined and law-abiding societies
(B) lessening public outcry over poor living conditions for convicts
(C) protecting the poor from exploitation by businessmen and the rich
(D) adding an element of fear to society for psychological manipulation of mass populations
(E) the rehabilitation and reintegration into society of the most violent criminals


64. The MOST important form of literary expression for the Romantics was
(A) the educational treatise
(B) poetry
(C) the novel
(D) the play
(E) the historical biography


65. Which of the following artists painted the impressionistic Rain, Steam, and Speed—The Great Western
Railroad shown in the illustration?
(A) Caspar David Friedrich
(B) Joseph Malford William Turner
(C) Eugene Delacroix
(D) John-Francois Millet
(E) Paul Cezanne


66. In economic matters, Napoleon III
(A) had a laissez-faire attitude
(B) gave to France a larger empire than even that of Britain
(C) strove to diminish the power of great industrialists
(D) established monopolies for foreign firms with expertise lacking in French firms
(E) used government resources to stimulate the national economy and industrial growth


67. The Red Shirts’ leader whose military command helped unify Italy was
(A) Prince Napoleon
(B) Giuseppe Garibaldi
(C) Victor Emmanuel II
(D) Camillo di Cavour
(E) Charles Albert


68. As prime minister of Prussia, Otto von Bismarck
(A) instituted important liberal land reforms
(B) largely bypassed parliament to pursue his goal to modernize the military
(C) was totally dependent on the Prussian military
(D) was extremely unpopular among ordinary Germans
(E) became the first German emperor in 1871 after the Franco-Prussian War


69. The Ausgleich, or Compromise, of 1867
(A) created a loose federation of ethnic states within the Austrian Empire
(B) freed the serfs and eliminated compulsory labor in the Austrian Empire
(C) made Austria part of the North German Confederation
(D) created the dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary
(E) destroyed the unity that had been achieved between Austria and Hungary in the 1848
revolutions


70. Karl Marx embraced the German philosopher Hegel’s idea of the dialectic, positing that
(A) all change in history is the result of clashes between directly antagonistic elements
(B) no real changes in society can occur before industrialization
(C) dictatorship is the central political force in all history
(D) political dialogs are the highest form of intellectual thought
(E) reality is spiritual and transcendent


71. Which of the following statements BEST applies to Charles Darwin and his evolutionary theory?
(A) His ideas were readily accepted by religious fundamentalists and cultural conservatives.
(B) His works were truly revolutionary and he was the first person to propose a theory of
evolution.
(C) He documented how natural selection governed the adaptation of species to their
environment.
(D) His On the Origin of Species described man’s evolution from animal origins through natural
selection.
(E) His On the Origin of Species was censored and banned by the British government in


72. The dominant literary and artistic movement in the 1850s and 1860s was
(A) Romanticism
(B) Realism
(C) Positivism
(D) Modernism
(E) Expressionism


73. By the early twentieth century, Germany began to replace Britain as Europe’s industrial leader largely
because of
(A) Britain’s careless and radical changes made to its industries
(B) Germany’s pragmatic laissez-faire approach towards industry
(C) Britain’s reliance on cartels to invest large sums of money in new industries
(D) Germany’s fast growing chemical, heavy electrical equipment, and steel industries
(E) the exhaustion of iron and coal resources in the British isles


74. Some of the most powerful labor unions of the nineteenth-century were found in
(A) Italy
(B) Germany
(C) France
(D) Italy
(E) Russia


75. By 1900, most primary-level European educational systems were
(A) free and compulsory
(B) expensive to operate and charged high tuition
(C) backward and lacked good teachers
(D) still based on a medieval era curriculum
(E) designed to teach trade skills rather than reading and writing


76. Louis Napoleon’s Second Empire was brought to an end by
(A) France’s defeat in the Franco-Prussian War
(B) the emperor’s financial policies
(C) his poor choice of administrators
(D) his defeat by the Austrians
(E) his failure to produce an heir to the imperial throne


77. A key reason for Germany supplanting England as the industrial leader of Europe was
(A) British unwillingness to support and encourage formal technical and scientific education
(B) British decentralization of factory production
(C) German use of gas-powered internal combustion engines to drive all factory production
(D) massive German importation of skilled British workers
(E) geography, for German was located on the continent of Europe and England was an island


78. Which of the following statements BEST applies to the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary before
World War I?
(A) Both Austria and Hungary had working democratic parliamentary systems.
(B) The Magyars dominated politics in Austria under Emperor William II.
(C) The nationality problem was unresolved and led to strong German and other nationalist
movements.
(D) Prime minister Count Edward von Taafe was ousted in 1893 by the disgruntled Slavic
minorities.
(E) The Austrians and the Hungarians granted independence to the Czechs and Serbs.


79. The quantum theory of energy developed by Max Planck raised fundamental questions about
(A) the structure of stars and their positions
(B) the accepted medieval theories of chemical reaction
(C) the relationship between time and space
(D) the safe transmission of electrical energy to power modern economies
(E) the subatomic realm of the atom and the basic building blocks of the material world


80. Social Darwinism
(A) applied Darwin’s theories to the study of society as large
(B) was an effort to explain the problems of society by psychological means
(C) was a scientific sociological explanation of Darwin’s biological ideas
(D) was advocated most strongly by Friedrich Nietzsche
(E) was opposed to concepts of racial superiority


81. Marie Curie is known for her work with
(A) DNA
(B) halfway houses
(C) the temperance movement
(D) radiation
(E) relativity


82. The leader of the women’s suffrage movement in England was
(A) Louise Michel
(B) Babette Josephs
(C) Emmeline Pankhurst
(D) Octavia Hill
(E) Nancy Astor


83. Theodor Herzl, the leader of the Zionist movement,
(A) hoped that the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine would protect European Jews from antiSemitism
(B) advocated the development of separate Jewish communities in European cities
(C) argued for European Jews to assimilate by embracing Christianity
(D) maintained that living conditions for Jews were better in Eastern Europe than in Western
Europe
(E) attempted to increase the numbers of Jewish Europeans through greater evangelical efforts


84. The painting in the illustration is an example of
(A) Romanticism
(B) Realism
(C) Naturalism
(D) Impressionism
(E) Post-Impressionism


85. The Boer War was fought by the British in
(A) Nigeria
(B) Northern Rhodesia
(C) Kenya
(D) Botswana
(E) South Africa


86. The Triple Alliance included which of the following countries?
(A) England, Germany, and Italy
(B) Russia, England, and France
(C) Italy, Turkey, and England
(D) Germany, Italy, and Austria-Hungary
(E) America, Britain, and France


87. In the early twentieth century, the primary antagonists in the Balkans were the
(A) Serbs and Austrians
(B) Russians and French
(C) English and Germans
(D) Serbs and Croats
(E) Ottomans and Germans


88. The painting in the illustration is an example of
(A) Impressionism
(B) Post-Impressionism
(C) Cubism
(D) Abstractionism
(E) Surrealism


89. Before the outbreak of World War I, most Europeans were
(A) highly optimistic and felt material progress would lead to an “earthly paradise”
(B) indifferent towards the future and lived in the present moment
(C) extremely negative, and many people believed that the end of the world was near
(D) happy to let their views be determined by state agencies
(E) focused on their own families and had little or no knowledge about the outside world


90. The outbreak of the Great War was GREATLY accelerated by the Schlieffen Plan, which
(A) promised full-fledged German support for Austrian military actions against Serbia
(B) detailed the Black Hand’s plan for the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand of Austria
(C) called for a rapid German invasion France through neutral Belgium before an attack on
Russia
(D) outlined complete Russian mobilization against Germany and Austria-Hungary
(E) justified Germany’s decision to focus most of its military resources in the east against Russia.


91. The Austrian ultimatum to Serbia precipitated World War I in part because
(A) Austria had received unconditional German support for military action
(B) England refused to guarantee Serbian territorial integrity
(C) France refused to cancel their alliance with the Habsburgs
(D) Italy renewed its military alliance with Austria
(E) Russia refused to give moral or diplomatic support to the Serbs


92. Most Europeans believed that the Great War would
(A) be the same length as the American Civil War
(B) be an exciting and patriotic event that would be over in a few months
(C) last years but would not fundamentally realign the map of Europe
(D) result in the unification of Europe as one centralized and highly militarized government
(E) bring a violent Marxist revolution to Europe


93. The usual tactic of trench warfare was to
(A) surround the enemy and starve him into submission
(B) use heavy artillery bombardments and then launch direct frontal infantry assaults on welldefended enemy positions
(C) attempt to outflank the enemy through rapid and mobile deployment of troops and cavalry
(D) meet the opposing force on the “field of honor” between the trenches for hand-to-hand
combat
(E) avoid any actual combat with the aim of starving the enemy into surrendering


94. The entry of the United States into World War I in April 1917
(A) gave the nearly-defeated allies a psychological boost
(B) was greatly feared by the German naval staff
(C) was a response to Turkey’s entrance into the war on the side of the Central Powers
(D) put an end to Germany’s use of unlimited submarine warfare
(E) was too late to have any impact upon the events of the war


95. In World War I, the Ottoman Empire fought on the side of
(A) Austria and Germany
(B) Russia
(C) Italy
(D) France and Britain
(E) America


96. Women workers during World War I succeeded by
(A) winning the right to vote immediately following the war
(B) gaining wage equality with men by the end of the war
(C) achieving permanent job security in the once male-dominated workplace
(D) participating in all industries except for textiles
(E) wrestling corporate control of firms from warring men


97. The Russian army’s woes during World War I included all of the following EXCEPT
(A) not enough manpower
(B) poor military leadership
(C) lack of modern armaments
(D) great losses of men in battle
(E) disastrous political leadership


98. After the Bolshevik seized power in November 1917, Lenin
(A) accelerated the war effort against Germany
(B) returned the control of factories to their rightful owners
(C) ratified the redistribution of land to starving peasants
(D) successfully managed to reestablish the Duma under socialist control
(E) inaugurated a worldwide Marxist revolution


99. All of the following states were created out of the Austro-Hungarian Empire following World War I
EXCEPT
(A) Austria
(B) Hungary
(C) Poland
(D) Czechoslovakia
(E) All of the above


100. The Treaty of Versailles
(A) fully absolved the Central Powers of guilt for causing the war
(B) created Wilson’s United Nations
(C) forced Germany to acknowledge “war guilt” and pay reparations
(D) created a system to dismantle the Turkish Empire
(E) brought a lasting peace to Europe


101. The scene would have been a common sight in
(A) France after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871
(B) Russia in the aftermath of the Bolshevik Revolution of November 1917
(C) Germany in the early 1920s
(D) the United States during the Great Depression
(E) Great Britain during the German Blitz of 1940


102. Which of the following was a MAJOR cause of the Great Depression?
(A) European governments were too involved in their own economies.
(B) America recalled its loans from European markets.
(C) Underproduction led to high prices for agricultural goods in eastern and central Europe.
(D) The League of Nations couldn’t produce effective economic policies for different economic
regions.
(E) German economic difficulties reduced the size of European markets.


103. Mussolini’s Fascist dictatorship
(A) lacked a secret police force
(B) sponsored highly popular and well attended Fascist youth organizations
(C) was primarily aimed at aiding the workers and peasants
(D) never created the degree of totalitarian control found in Russia and Germany in the 1930s
(E) advanced women’s rights and encouraged them to take industrial jobs


104. In Mein Kampf, Adolf Hitler
(A) outlined his plan to take power through a massive rebellion and violent revolution
(B) told his life story and detailed his ideology of racism, Aryan supremacy, and anti-Semitism
(C) avoided discussing his anti-Semitism for political reasons
(D) showed German politicians that he was a dangerous extremist
(E) was unable to reach German readers because of a ban imposed on the book


105. The photograph in the illustration is a scene from
(A) Moscow in November, 1917
(B) Berlin in November, 1938
(C) Warsaw in September, 1939
(D) London in August, 1940
(E) Dresden in February, 1945


106. The only Eastern European nation to maintain political democracy throughout the 1930’s was
(A) Bulgaria
(B) Czechoslovakia
(C) Poland
(D) Hungary
(E) Yugoslavia


107. The collectivization of agriculture under Stalin was characterized by the
(A) spread of famine caused by peasant hoarding and the slaughter of livestock
(B) cooperation of kulaks with peasant soviets
(C) gradual establishment of larger and more efficient collective farms
(D) rapid improvement of the financial well-being of peasant farmers
(E) establishment of a widely praised system of large farms granting autonomy to peasant
farmers


108. The MOST famous of the Surrealistic painters was
(A) Arnold Schonberg
(B) Salvador Dali
(C) Walter Gropius
(D) Wassily Kandinsky
(E) Pablo Picasso


109. The physicist Walter Heisenberg was MOST noted for
(A) proposing that uncertainty was at the bottom of all physical laws
(B) being part of the first team to split the atom
(C) resurrecting the scientific predictability of classical physics
(D) the development of the atomic bomb
(E) his quantum theory


110. The Munich Conference
(A) was applauded by Winston Churchill as a “wise and noble agreement”
(B) established that German desires for the Sudetenland necessitated war with the Western
powers
(C) was criticized by Winston Churchill as a tragic outcome of appeasement
(D) represented a severe setback for Hitler
(E) saved Czechoslovakia from destruction and Europe from another long and painful war


111. Immediately after the fall of Poland,
(A) France and Britain declared war and began an offensive against Germany
(B) France and Britain continued to appease Hitler
(C) the Soviet Union declared war on Nazi Germany
(D) Germany turned on its Russian allies
(E) France and Britain declared war, but remained relatively inactive militarily


112. Japanese expansion in the 1930s was fueled primarily by
(A) an expanding population and severe lack of natural resources on the island nation
(B) an intense hatred for the Chinese and Chinese culture
(C) a desire by ruling military leaders to test their newly developed and newly organized armed
forces
(D) a belief by many Japanese that they were a “master race” destined to rule all of Asia
(E) a fear of an imminent invasion of Japan by the United States.


113. Hitler’s “Final Solution” to the Jewish problem called for
(A) the extermination of all Jews
(B) the forced deportation of the Jews to Madagascar
(C) the resettlement of Jews in ghettos, isolated from other Europeans
(D) breeding “Jewish genes” out of the Jewish population itself
(E) the expulsion of all German Jews to Poland and elsewhere in Eastern Europe


114. The official reason for dropping atomic bombs on Japan was to
(A) punish Japan for Pearl Harbor
(B) test the new weapon to see how powerful it was
(C) conserve conventional explosives that were of short supply in the United States
(D) end the war quickly and avoid hundreds of thousands of future American casualties
(E) demonstrate the might of American nuclear weapons to the Soviet Union


115. Which of the following factors contributed MOST to the development of the Cold War in Eastern
Europe?
(A) The withdrawal of victorious Russian armies from lands conquered during the campaign
against Nazism
(B) Raids by American troops pursuing German Nazi war criminals into areas of the former
Third Reich under Russian control
(C) Stalin’s desire to establish a buffer zone of pro-Soviet governments in the countries of
Eastern Europe
(D) The domination of Austrian and Italian politics by popular pro-Communist parties
(E) The American demand that the Soviet Union abandon communism and replace it with
capitalism


116. The Common Market was
(A) primarily a military alliance of certain European countries
(B) a forum of European nations founded to solve social problems
(C) established to improve member economies and promote free trade between them
(D) started for cultural reasons to combat American materialism
(E) less than successful because of the opposition of France’s Charles de Gaulle


117. Which of the following American Presidents dubbed the Soviet Union the “evil empire” and launched
the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)?
(A) Richard Nixon
(B) Jimmy Carter
(C) Ronald Reagan
(D) Bill Clinton
(E) George Bush


118. The economic problems of the United States in the 1970s are referred to as
(A) inflation
(B) deflation
(C) depression
(D) hyperinflation
(E) stagflation


119. The philosophical doctrine of existentialism, which emphasized the role of personal choice and
responsibility in shaping an individual’s destiny, was
(A) dominant in the universities of Great Britain and the United States
(B) concerned with logic and the theory of knowledge
(C) totally at odds with the confidence and prosperity of the post-war world
(D) best expressed in the works of the French writers Albert Camus and Jean-Paul Sartre
(E) accepted by liberal Christian churches and Jewish synagogues but not by more conservative
faiths


120. The photograph in the illustration shows
(A) anti-Yeltsin demonstrators in the Soviet Union
(B) food riots in Bosnia-Herzegovina
(C) a counter-culture “love-in” at Woodstock
(D) the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989
(E) the confused aftermath of September 11, 2001
