
merican society has increasingly turned to the judiciary to find answers to personal, eco- nomic, social, and political problems. Courts are often asked to determine our rights, and important legal questions touch almost every aspect of our lives. For example, what level of privacy should we expect in our cars, workplaces, and homes? What treatment should people of different ethnicities, races, genders, sexual orientations, or age groups expect? In a divorce proceeding, with which parent should the children live? Should an accused person go to jail and, if so, for how long? Should a woman be allowed to terminate her pregnancy? Should a patient be allowed to refuse potentially lifesaving treatment? These are among the thousands of questions asked and answered daily by courts in the United States.
Texas courts have heard important or controversial cases involving topics such as abortion, the death penalty, the right to vote, a criminal case involving the attorney general, a libel case against Austin-based radio personality and conspiracy theorist Alex Jones, and perhaps the largest civil case in U.S. history in which a Fayette County jury found Don Wilburn Collins liable for an impossible-to-collect $150 billion after setting an eight-year-old boy on fire on his eighth birthday.' Court cases, large and small, determine our legal rights, shape public policy, and undeniably affect our daily lives.
In this chapter, we focus on the Texas courts, judges, and juries. The sheer size and complexity of the Texas court system will quickly become clear. We also look at the controversies surrounding the selection of Texas judges and the politics that affect the legal process.
Legal Cases and Jurisdiction
LO 9.1
Describe the differences between criminal and civil cases and between original and appellate jurisdiction.
Legal cases can be classified into two broad categories, civil and criminal, based on their subject matter. Jurisdiction within the court system is determined by whether the case is being tried for the first time or if a prior court decision is being reviewed on appeal.

Civil and Criminal Cases
In the American legal system, cases are generally classified as either civil or criminal. Table 9.1 shows the most important differences between these two types of cases. A civil case concerns private rights and remedies and usually involves private parties or organizations (Garcia v. Smith), although the government may on occasion be a party to a civil case. A personal injury suit, a divorce case, a child custody dispute, a breach-of-contract issue, and a conflict over water rights are all examples of causes of action in civil cases.
A criminal case involves a violation of penal law that is prosecuted by the state. If con- victed, a violator of penal law is punished by a fine, imprisonment, or both. The action is by the state against the accused (State of Texas v. Smith). Examples of criminal actions range from speeding to murder. One of the most important differences between civil and criminal cases is the burden of
proof (the duty that a party has to prove its position in court). In civil cases, the standard used is a preponderance of the evidence, meaning that whichever party has more evidence or proof on its side should win the case, no matter how slight the advantage is. However, in a criminal case, the burden of proof falls entirely on the government or prosecution. The prosecution must prove that the defendant is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, the standard used to determine the guilt or innocence of a person criminally charged. To prove a defendant guilty, the state must provide sufficient evidence of guilt so that jurors have no doubt that might cause a reasonable person to question whether the accused was guilty.

criminal case
Involves a violation of penal law that is prosecuted by the state.
burden of proof
The duty a party has to prove its position in court.
preponderance of the evidence
Whichever party has more evidence or proof on its side should win the case, no matter how slight the advantage is.
beyond a reasonable doubt
The standard used to determine the guilt or innocence of a person criminally charged. To prove a defendant guilty, the state must provide sufficient evidence of guilt so that jurors have no doubt that might cause a reasonable person to question whether the accused was guilty.

Table 9.1 Major Differences between Civil and Criminal Cases
Civil and criminal cases involve very different concepts of law based on different court procedures, who brings the case, and the consequences that result from court decisions in each type of case.
Civil Cases
Criminal Cases
Deal primarily with individual or property rights and involve the concept of responsibility but not guilt.
Plaintiff, or petitioner, who brings suit is often a private party, as is the defendant or respondent.
Dispute is usually set out in a petition.
A somewhat more relaxed procedure is used to balance or weigh the evidence; the side with the preponderance of the evidence wins the suit.
Final court remedy is relief from or compensation for the violation of legal rights.
Deal with public concepts of proper behavior and morality as defined in penal law. A plea of guilty or not guilty is entered.
Case is initiated by a government prosecutor on behalf of the public.
Specific charges of wrongdoing are spelled out in a grand jury indictment or a writ of information.
Strict rules of procedure are used to evaluate evidence. The standard of proof is guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Determination of guilt results in punishment.
Why should criminal cases require a higher standard of proof than civil cases?

Sometimes an action may have both civil and criminal consequences. Suppose that in the course of an armed robbery at a jewelry store, the perpetrator shoots a sales associate. The state could prosecute the suspect for aggravated robbery and assault, which would be a criminal action. Then, the sales associate could sue the robber for compensation for medical expenses, lost earning power, and other damages, which would be a civil action.
Original and Appellate Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction is the power to try a case being heard for the first time. It involves following legal rules of procedure in hearing witnesses, viewing material evidence, and examining other evidence to determine guilt in criminal cases or responsibility in civil cases. The judge oversees procedure, but evaluating evidence is the jury's job (unless the right to a jury trial has been waived, in which case the judge weighs the evidence). The verdict or judgment is determined and the remedy is set. A trial involves the determination of fact and the application of law.
Appellate jurisdiction refers to the power vested in an appellate court to review and revise the judicial action of an inferior court. Such appeals do not involve a new trial but rather a review of the law as it was applied in the original trial. Many appeals are decided by review of the record (transcript) of the case and the respective lawyers' briefs, which are written arguments prepared by lawyers arguing a case in court that summarize the facts of the case, the pertinent laws, and the application of those laws to the facts supporting their positions. Sometimes, lawyers may appear to present oral arguments, but witnesses and material evidence are not presented because appellate proceedings are based on law and not fact. A reversal does not necessarily mean that the convicted individual is innocent, only that the

original jurisdiction
The power to try a case being heard for the first time.
appellate jurisdiction
The power vested in an appellate court to review and revise the judicial action of an inferior court.
briefs
Written arguments prepared by lawyers arguing a case in court that summarize the facts of the case, the pertinent laws, and the application of those laws to the facts supporting their positions.

legal process was improper. Consequently, that person may be tried again, and questions of double jeopardy (a second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal in the first trial) are not involved because the individual waives the right against double jeopardy by appealing the case.
Court Organization
LO 9.2
Explain how the courts are organized in Texas, and identify the jurisdiction of each major court.
Figure 9.1 shows the organizational structure of the Texas court system and the various types and levels of courts in the system. It is important to note that some courts within this rather large and complicated system have overlapping jurisdiction.
Municipal Courts
The state authorizes incorporated cities and towns to establish municipal courts, and city charters or municipal ordinances provide for their status and organization. Legally, municipal courts have exclusive jurisdiction to try violations of city ordinances. They also share with justices of the peace the power to act as a magistrate, to issue search and arrest warrants, and to try minor violations of state law-class C misdemeanors for which punishment is a fine of $500 or less and does not include a jail sentence. However, most municipal court cases involve traffic and parking violations, and it is these courts citizens are most likely to encounter during their lifetimes, often an experience that resembles assembly-line justice (see Image 9.1) because of the rapid pace with which they dispose of minor cases.
Appeals of municipal court decisions heard by county-level courts, like all appeals, must be based on the record of the trial and many larger municipal court systems are courts of record. However, in many smaller cities, records are not kept and defendants may demand a com-

pletely new trial in overworked county courts, where most such cases are simply dismissed. These new tri- als are known as de novo trials in which a higher court completely retries the case, in contrast to an appeal in which a higher court simply reviews the law as decided by a lower court.
People who favor the court-of-record concept often point to the large amount of revenue lost because trials de novo usually result in dismissal of minor traffic cases. Opponents of the concept argue that municipal courts are too often operated as a means of raising revenue rather than of achieving justice.
Judges of the municipal courts meet whatever
qualifications are set by the city charter or ordinances
(see Figure 9.2). Some cities require specific legal
training or experience. Other charters say very little
about qualifications. Most municipal court judges
are appointed for two-year terms but serve at the
pleasure of the governing bodies that have selected
them. Furthermore, these judges' salaries are paid
entirely by their respective cities and vary widely.
Where statutes authorize them, some cities have
established more than one municipal court or more
than one judge for each court.

double jeopardy
A second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal in the first trial.
de novo trials
Trials in which a higher court completely retries the case, in contrast to an appeal in which a higher court simply reviews the law as decided by a lower court.

Justices of the Peace
The justice of the peace courts in Texas are authorized by the Texas Constitution, which requires that county commissioners establish at least one and not more than eight justice precincts per county; a precinct is the area from which each justice of the peace is elected for a four- year term. County commissioners determine how many justices of the peace shall be elected (determined by the population) and where their courts shall sit. Changes are made continu- ously, making it difficult to pin down the number of justices of the peace at any given time. The Texas Judicial Council determined that there were 799 justices of the peace in 2023.2
The functions of the justice of the peace courts are varied. Figure 9.3 shows that they mostly handle criminal cases. They have jurisdiction over criminal cases in which the fine is less than $500, but may also handle civil matters in which the dispute involves less than
Figure 9.3 Civil and Criminal Cases Filed in Texas Courts
This figure shows the share of civil and criminal cases filed in Texas courts in 2021. Minor cases are handled in municipal, justice of the peace, and county-level courts. District courts handle serious civil and criminal cases that are occasionally appealed to courts of appeal. The supreme court is the court of last resort in civil cases, and the court of criminal appeals is the final court of appeal for criminal cases.

$20,000. They may issue warrants for search and arrest, serve ex officio as public notaries, conduct preliminary hearings, perform marriages, handle landlord-tenant relations, act as coroners in counties having no medical examiner, and serve as small claims courts. Most cases filed in justice courts are criminal and involve traffic violations.
No specific statutory or constitutional provisions require that a justice of the peace be a lawyer. A justice of the peace who is not a licensed attorney is required by statute to take an 80-hour course in the performance of the duties of the office, plus a 20-hour course each year thereafter at an accredited state-supported institution of higher education. Serious ques- tions have arisen as to the constitutionality of this provision because it adds a qualification for the office not specified in the constitution. Also, justice of the peace salaries vary a great deal from county to county and at times even from justice to justice within the same county.
The qualifications and competence of justices of the peace have been controversial. Crit- ics have argued that they are often unprofessional, incompetent, and biased. They argue that justices of the peace should be professionalized and that their jurisdiction in underpopulated rural areas should be consolidated. Defenders have traditionally referred to the justice courts as the "people's courts" and maintain that elimination of the justice courts would remove the local control many treasure. To reform them, it is argued, would put judicial power in the hands of uncaring professionals and would quash the amateur status of these justices, who make decisions by relying on common sense.
County-Level Courts
The Texas Constitution and statutes passed by the state legislature establish various mid-level courts to try intermediate-level civil and criminal cases throughout the county.

Constitutional County Court Each of the 254 counties is required to establish one constitutional county court presided over by the county judge. County courts handle pro- bate and other civil matters in which the dispute is between $200 and $20,000; their criminal jurisdiction is confined to serious misdemeanors for which punishment is a fine greater than $500 or a jail sentence not to exceed one year. The Texas Constitution requires that the county judge be elected by voters for a four-year
term and be "well informed in the law of the state"-a rather ambiguous stipulation. Thus,
the constitution does not require that a county judge possess a law degree. Salaries are paid by the county and vary greatly, as does the quality of justice that county judges dispense. Because the constitutional county judge also has administrative responsibilities and serves as presiding officer of the commissioners court (the governing body for Texas counties and not a judicial entity at all), he or she may have little time to handle judicial matters. The legislature has responded by establishing statutory courts in those more populated counties where they are needed to assume some or all of the county judge's judicial workload, thereby relieving the county judge to act as a full-time county administrator.
Statutory County Courts The Texas Legislature has established 259 statutory county courts at law that operate in some but not all counties and their jurisdiction and qualifications vary somewhat according to the laws that established them. A few specialize in either criminal or civil cases, but most have jurisdiction to handle both kinds of cases. Most have civil jurisdiction in cases involving less than $250,000 and many also handle probate matters. Their criminal jurisdiction (see Image 9.2) includes misdemeanors that are more serious than those tried by the justice of the peace and municipal courts-misdemeanors that include a jail sentence or a fine in excess of $500. Figure 9.3 shows the majority of cases filed in county-level courts are criminal, with cases involving drugs, theft, and driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs being the most common.

All county court-at-law judges are elected by voters countywide. Most must meet qualifications that include residency and at least four years of expe- rience as a practicing attorney or judge.
Statutory Probate Courts The
Texas Legislature has also established a few (nineteen) probate courts primarily in larger metropolitan counties to handle cases involving such probate matters as wills, estates, and guardianships. Like other statutory county court judges, probate judges are elected countywide for four-year terms; they must be residents and attorneys or judges with at least five years of experience.
District Courts
District courts are often described as the chief trial courts of the state and, as a group, these courts are called the general trial courts. Currently, there are 492 district courts in Texas, all of which

function as single-judge courts. Each judge, elected for a four-year term by voters in their district,
must be at least 25 years of age, a resident of the district for two years, a citizen of the United
States, and a licensed practicing lawyer or judge for a combined eight years. District courts have jurisdiction in felony cases, which comprise approximately one-third of their criminal caseload. Civil cases in which the matter of controversy exceeds $200 may also be tried in district courts, and such cases constitute the greatest share of their workload. In addition, juvenile, family, and divorce cases are usually handled by district courts. Although most district courts exercise both criminal and civil jurisdiction, there is a tendency in metropolitan areas for the multiple district courts to specialize in criminal, civil, or family
law matters. Figure 9.3 shows that the district courts handle more civil than criminal cases. Many criminal and civil cases are either dismissed or settled out of court by negotiation between the parties involved. In criminal cases, this negotiation is called plea bargaining, which may result in a deal in which the prosecutor and the defense attorney agree to a lighter sentence or other benefits in exchange for a guilty plea. This process saves the state the time and expense of going to trial; 96 percent of convictions in district courts result from a plea of guilty or no contest rather than a verdict after a trial. Without plea bargaining, court delays would be

Did You Know? Of the few felony cases that go to trial, 92 percent result in a conviction.
increased by months, if not years, in many urban areas. Although efficient, this practice raises many issues con- cerning equity and justice because it often encourages innocent people to plead guilty and allows guilty people to escape with less punishment than provided for by the law. Likewise, many civil lawsuits are resolved by negotiated settlements between the parties. At times, this may be an appropriate and just recourse, but in many of the state's most populous counties, there is such a backlog of cases before the courts that it can take years for a matter to be heard and settled. As a result, litigants often choose to settle their cases out of court for reasons other than justice.

Courts of Appeals
Currently, 14 courts of appeals hear immediate appeals in both civil and criminal cases from district and county courts in their area. Actually, only a small percentage of trial court cases are appealed; for example, in 2022, only 6,326 cases were filed in courts of appeal. Appeals judges for appeals courts 1 through 14 are elected from districts, shown in Figure 9.4, for six- year terms and must be at least 35 years of age, with a minimum of 10 years of experience as a lawyer or judge. In 2023 a law was passed creating a fifteenth court of appeals. Consisting of
Figure 9.4 Appeals Court Districts
Fourteen courts of appeals are multi-judge courts that serve the geographical areas shown on this map. These courts handle both criminal and civil appeals from district courts in their area. Review the purpose of appellate courts at https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=1KUEeSUm-_c&list=PLx-bSD_e1kHs3vsMi0fwtTzuVDv1yYprk&index=6.


five judges elected statewide, the new court will handle appeals in cases brought against the state, state agencies, and universities. The five judges will initially be appointed by Governor Abbott during the fall of 2023 and then directly elected in 2024.
Court of Criminal Appeals
Texas has a dual system of courts of last resort. The Texas Supreme Court is the highest state appellate court in civil matters, and the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals is the highest state appellate court in criminal matters. Among the other 49 states, only neighboring Oklahoma has a similar bifurcated system.
Although most criminal cases decided by the 14 courts of appeals do not advance further, some are heard by the Court of Criminal Appeals, which consists of a presiding judge and eight other judges. Texas Court of Criminal Appeals judges are elected statewide in partisan elections for six-year overlapping terms, with three judges elected every two years. Sometimes more than three positions are on the ballot because a justice has resigned and a new judge must be elected to complete the unexpired term. Justices must be at least 35 years of age and be lawyers or judges with 10 years of experience.
In addition to appeals from the 14 courts of appeals, the Court of Criminal Appeals hears automatic appeals from district courts in death penalty cases. The death sentence was once ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court because it was applied in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner, but it is now permitted if careful procedures are used to be certain that it is being applied fairly. Automatic review by Texas's Court of Criminal Appeals is one of the procedures the state adopted to satisfy the requirements of U.S. Supreme Court.
Since the U.S. Supreme Court restored the use of capital punish- ment in 1976, Texas has executed far more people than any other state. However, the rate of execution has declined in recent years

in part due to rising concerns about the possibility of innocent people being executed and less enthusiasm among district attorneys in the state's most populous counties for pursuing the death penalty. The death penalty debate is discussed extensively in Chapter 10.
Supreme Court
The Texas Supreme Court is the final court of appeals in civil and juvenile cases. Original jurisdiction of the court extends to the issuance of writs and the conduct of proceedings for the involuntary retirement or removal of judges. All other cases are in appellate jurisdiction. The court also has the power to establish rules for the administration of justice-rules of civil practice and procedure for courts having civil jurisdiction. In addition, it makes rules govern- ing the licensing of members of the state bar.
The Texas Supreme Court consists of one chief justice and eight associate justices-all elected statewide. As is the case for the Court of Criminal Appeals, three of the nine supreme court justices are elected every two years for six-year terms. A Texas Supreme Court justice must be at least 35 years of age, a citizen of the United States, a resident of Texas, and a lawyer or judge of a court of record for at least 10 years.
The Texas Supreme Court spends much of its time deciding which petitions for review will be granted, because not all appeals are heard. Generally, it takes only those cases it views as presenting the most significant legal issues. It should also be noted that the state's supreme court sometimes makes such important legal decisions that it has a major impact on public policy

in the state. For example, in 1989, the court unanimously declared, in Edgewood v. Kirby (777 S.W.2d 391), that the wide disparities between rich and poor school districts were unaccept- able and ordered changes in the financing of Texas's public schools. Judges' partisanship and ideology may affect their judicial decisions in high-impact areas of public policy such as elec- tion and abortion laws, enforcement of anti-discrimination laws, applicability of corporate liability laws, consumer protection, and environmental protection laws as well as the state constitution and even state abortion laws. For example, the Texas Supreme Court allowed a 1925 antiabortion law to go back into effect almost immediately after federal abortion protections were overturned by the June 2022 Dobbs decision."
Juries
LO
9.3 Analyze the role of trial juries and grand juries, and explain the duties of citizens serving on them.
Juries are an important and controversial aspect of the American judicial system. Some people argue that juries are beneficial because they allow for community input and the use of common
sense in the legal system. Others claim that they often do not fairly represent the community and that their reasons for their decisions are often inappropriate or suspect. What is certain is that although millions of Americans serve on juries every year, the frequency of their use is declining, and an overwhelming number of cases in our legal system are not decided by them.7

Petit (Trial) Jury
A jury for a criminal or civil trial is known as a petit jury, or trial jury. Trial juries consist of six persons in lower-level courts such as municipal, justice of the peace, and county-level courts while district court juries consist of twelve persons. Because the purpose of trial juries is to evaluate the evidence or facts of a case, they are not used in appellate courts which only review the law that was applied in trial courts.
The Right to Trial by Jury The Texas Constitution and the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments in the U.S. Constitution guarantee the right to trial by jury in criminal cases; in such cases, juries must reach a unanimous verdict. Texas laws also guarantee the right to a jury trial in most civil cases where one of the parties requests it. However, in these cases, only five-sixths of the jury must agree in order to issue a valid verdict; that would be at least five in lower-level courts and ten in district courts.
Even if only one juror disagrees in a criminal case, the result is a hung jury, which is a jury that is unable to agree on a verdict after a suitable period of deliberation; the result is a mistrial. In this event, the prosecutor must decide whether to try the case again with a dif- ferent jury or drop the matter. Because no verdict was reached with a hung jury, the accused person is not put in double jeopardy by a second trial.
Jury Duty Rights are often accompanied by responsibilities, and the right to a trial by jury is a classic example. It would be impossible to expect the right to a trial by jury without tasking other citizens with the responsibility to serve on juries. Qualified citizens who are summoned to serve on a jury must appear or be subject to a fine ranging from $100 to $1,000. Persons older than 70 years of age, high school and college students, and primary uncompensated caretakers for persons unable to care for themselves are automati- cally exempt, as are those with legal custody of a child 12 years old or younger whose service would leave the child without adequate supervision. While these people are exempt from mandatory jury service, they may serve if they desire. Most other excuses from jury service are at the discretion of the judge.

Jurors in Texas are paid between $6 and $50 a day at the discretion of the counties. Coun- ties, in a few instances, may also choose to pay for transportation reimbursement, free meals, and child-care facilities. Texas employers are not required to provide paid leave to employees serving as jurors, but they cannot fire employees for serving as jurors.
Jury Selection Prospective jurors are randomly summoned or compelled to appear from among those individuals who are registered to vote, have a Texas driver's license, or have a Texas identification card. Members of this "venire" or jury panel will be screened to determine who will actually serve as jurors. To be qualified, a juror must be a literate citizen at least 18 years of age, qualified to vote, and not indicted or convicted for a theft or felony.
Attorneys for both sides question each member of the jury panel, and if either side believes
that a prospective juror has a preconceived opinion about guilt or innocence, the prosecutor
or defense attorney may bring a challenge for cause, which is a request to a judge that a
prospective juror not be allowed to serve on the jury for a specific reason, such as bias or prior
knowledge of the case. Challenges for cause extend to any factor that might convince a judge
that the juror could not render a fair and impartial decision. No limits are placed on the
number of challenges for cause, but the judge decides whether to grant each specific
challenge.

Statutes also allow challenges of jurors without cause. A challenge made to a prospective juror without being required to give a reason for removal is known as a peremptory challenge or a "strike." Since no reason needs to be provided to remove a juror, nothing other than intuition may cause an attorney in a case to ask that a juror be dismissed. The only limitations to this type of challenge occur when the judge believes that prospective jurors are being elimi- nated solely because of their ethnicity, race, or sex; however, it is difficult to know whether these challenges are motivated by bias.
Although peremptory challenges provide lawyers with a great deal of freedom in deciding to remove jurors, each side is given five to fifteen of these challenges depending on the type of case. Many lawyers maintain that jury selection is more significant than the actual argument of a case and that the verdict is determined at the jury-selection phase. Some law firms hire jury and trial consulting companies to assist in the selection process. Psychological profiles of ideal jurors may be used to try to exclude jurors who might be unfavorable to a client and to identify those who might be supportive. For example, the prosecution would quite possibly want a grandparent or parent of young children on a jury dealing with child molestation, while the defense would wish to avoid such a juror. Many trial law firms and prosecutors also maintain a file on jurors from previous cases to help them select or avoid prospective jurors based on their demographic profiles and personal history.
Grand Jury
When a person is accused of a serious crime, the matter is usually referred to a grand jury, which in Texas, consists of twelve people who sit in pretrial proceedings to determine if there is sufficient evidence to take a case to trial. A district judge usually calls for between 20 and 125 prospective grand jurors to be summoned in the same way as trial jurors. From this pool of potential grand jurors, twelve are selected to become the grand jury, with four other

peremptory challenge
A challenge made to a prospective juror without being required to give a reason for removal; the number of such challenges allotted to the prosecution and defense is limited.
grand jury
Grand jury, in Texas, the twelve people who sit in pretrial proceedings to determine whether sufficient evidence exists to try an individual and therefore return an indictment.

individuals chosen as alternates. But, unlike trial juries, grand juries do not determine guilt or innocence in a particular case; instead, they sit for a fixed term and hear any number of cases to determine whether indictments are justified.
An indictment is a formal written accusation issued by a grand jury against a party charged with a crime when it has determined that there is sufficient evidence to bring the accused to trial; a vote of at least nine of the twelve grand jurors is needed to indict in Texas. An indictment returned by a grand jury is sometimes referred to as a "true bill." If an indictment is not returned, the grand jury returns a "no bill," which is a grand jury's refusal to indict.
Grand jurors are ordinary citizens and rely heavily on the advice of the district attorney. At times, a grand jury may return indictments with little evidence simply because the district attorney asks for them. In fact, grand juries return true bills in approximately 95 percent of the cases brought before them, and it is famously said that a good prosecutor could indict a ham sandwich. Thus, grand juries may not always be an effective check on an overzealous prosecutor, and some states opt not to use them at all.
In practice, district attorneys have considerable discretion to determine whether an individual will be prosecuted. Ultimately, the best check against prosecution based on flimsy evidence is that district attorneys do not wish to waste resources on cases that they are likely to lose. Because district attorneys are elected, most of them seek to maintain a high "conviction rate" to present to voters
Did You Know? A gra its size. Historically, it was litera 23 members. Today, it may vary

Because grand juries are not themselves an adequate check on prosecutors, they are not regarded as essential elements of due process and a fair trial. Therefore, some states have dispensed with grand juries and substituted other procedures for charging individuals with crimes.
The alternative to a grand jury indictment is the information, a written accusation made by the prosecutor against a party charged with a crime. Filed by the prosecutor with the appropriate court, the information must be based on an investigation by the prosecutor after receiving a complaint and a sworn affidavit that a crime has been committed. In Texas, an information is most often used to charge someone with a minor offense.
Selection of Judges
LO 9.4 Evaluate the most common methods of judicial selection in the United States and in Texas.
The 50 states use a variety of methods to select their state judges; in fact, they may use
different methods to choose judges to different types of courts even within the same
state. For example, several East Coast states continue to allow their governor or legisla-
ture to appoint supreme court justices as they did during the early post-colonial period in
American history. The chief goal of an appointed judiciary is to give judges independence
in order to allow them to exercise their best judgment free from the pressures of daily
politics and public opinion. Clearly, this method of judicial selection is less democratic
than others.
During the era of Jacksonian Democracy in the 1830s, states began to democratize their institutions by providing for the widespread election of state officials, including their judges, on party tickets. The goal of partisan election of judges is public accountability and popular control of the courts, and except for municipal courts, Texas along with a few other states continue to use this method for electing judges.

How Does Texas Compare?
Selecting Judges
States use different methods to choose their judges, including those who serve on their supreme court. Figure 9.5 shows that twelve states allow their governor or legislature to appoint supreme court justices. More commonly, states use elections to select their judges. There are three general types of judicial elections. Texas (along with six other states) holds partisan
elections, whereas fifteen other states use nonpartisan elections, which do not include party labels on the ballot. The most popular method of selection (used in sixteen states) is some variation of the merit, or Missouri, plan, which claims to be less political and combines an initial appointment with retention elections. Review the Missouri plan at https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=NoeXycc0lJk.

Later reformers argued that justice is neither Republican nor Democratic and that party labels are irrelevant to judicial selection; today, many states use nonpartisan elections, which do not include party labels on their ballots. In practice, however, judicial candidates are usually clearly identified with one or the other of the political parties and are openly supported by party leaders and organizations. Critics of nonpartisan election argue that because judges, especially at the appellate level, make decisions that have a significant impact on policy, it is reasonable for voters to select judges on the basis of political party affiliation. Removing the candidates' party label from the ballot simply conceals valuable information concerning their general ideology and their pattern of judicial decision making.
Almost one-third of the states attempt to combine the advantages of election (accountability) with the advantages of appointment (independence) while selecting qualified candidates. Many of them use a variation of the merit plan, or Missouri plan, a method intended to select judges on the basis of the merit or quality of the candidates and not on political considerations. Under this system, the governor fills court vacancies from a list of nominees submitted by a judicial commission, and these appointees later face retention elections. A judicial screening commission is appointed to review the backgrounds of potential judges and submit a list of qualified candidates. From this list, the governor must appoint a judge to serve for a probationary term, thereby eliminating the need for a traditional partisan election campaign. Yet the public retains the ultimate authority over judges because, at the end of a trial period, the voters decide whether to retain or reject the judge for a fixed term simply by voting on the basis of the judge's record, usually without a competing candidate on the ballot. Historically, more than 90 percent of such votes result in the judges being retained in office. Critics note that appointive-elective plans may be less overtly political, but they are
political nonetheless; politics is pushed behind the scenes into maneuverings among
nomination commission proceedings and negotiations among the governor's staff when
judges are initially appointed. Some scholars have also found that this process is, in practice,
no less political than other selection methods and that there is no clear evidence that this
process produces different or more meritorious judges.

The Politics of Judicial Selection in Texas
The system of judicial selection in Texas and practices related to it have been under attack. We now examine why the courts and judges of Texas are criticized and, in doing so, we can gain a clearer understanding of the political nature of the court system.
Voter Knowledge Because Texas elects judges, a natural question arises: How
knowledgeable are voters in these judicial elections? In other words, are voters cognizant of the candidates and their records in office? Research on the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly shown that the vast majority of the public knows little about its rulings and actions. Therefore, if most Americans know very little about the U.S. Supreme Court- the court that receives far and away the most media attention in this country-how much do voters know about state and local courts? In a given election, Texas voters are regularly asked to cast a ballot to choose judges for the Supreme Court, the Court of Criminal Appeals, a court of appeals, district courts, county courts, and for a justice of the peace. For instance, many voters in Harris County may be presented with the task of electing more than 70 different judges in a single election. Both systematic research and abundant anecdotal evidence indicate that most voters in Texas are unaware of candidates' quali- fications or experience.

nonpartisan elections Elections in which party labels do not appear on the ballot.
merit plan, or Missouri plan
A method intended to select judges on the basis of the merit or quality of the candidates and not on political considerations. Under this system, the governor fills court vacancies from a list of nominees submitted by a judicial commission, and these appointees later face retention elections.

Partisanship Because they know so little about individual candidates, voters rely heav- ily on a candidate's partisan affiliation as a cue to determine how to vote in general elections. In other words, a voter who has no knowledge of the views or backgrounds of the candidates on the ballot may cast their vote based on the party label (Republican Party, Democratic Party, Libertarian Party, and Green Party) next to the candidate's name on the ballot. In Texas, this is a very common approach for making selections in judicial elections. Republican candidates have dominated recent elections for the state's highest courts, occupying all nine positions on the Supreme Court and all nine spots on the Court of Criminal Appeals. Historically, Republicans also dominated among the eighty judgeships across the state's fourteen courts of appeals, occupying sixty-six of the eighty judgeships and holding majorities in eleven of the fourteen courts before the 2018 election. This has changed dramatically over the past half dozen years. In 2023, a narrow majority (forty-two) of the eighty appeals court judges were Democrats, and a narrow minority (thirty-eight) Republicans (see Table 9.2). And, whereas in 2018, Democrats constituted a majority in only three courts of appeals; in 2023, they held the majority in six, including the influential fifth (Dallas), first (Houston), and fourteenth (Houston) courts of appeal.

It has been argued that because judges, especially at the appellate level, make significant policy decisions, it is reasonable for voters to select judges on the basis of political party affili- ation. Party affiliation may provide accurate information concerning the general ideology and thus the decision-making pattern of judges. However, even if this is true, voting based solely on a judicial candidate's political party can lead to controversial results. For example, in 2018, voters elevated Judge Rudy Delgado to the thirteenth court of appeals largely on a party-line vote even though he had largely stopped his campaign after having been suspended from his position as a district judge and been indicted for bribery and obstruction of justice." Some reformers, including many Republicans, have focused their attention on the prob- lems of partisan election, and as a result, a state commission recommended changing it in 2021. Republicans became especially concerned with partisanship in judicial elections once Democrats sweeping into judicial positions in some of the largest metropolitan areas. In fact, the Republican-controlled Legislature eliminated a single-mark, straight-ticket option from the ballot in the hope of preventing Democratic party-line sweeps of judicial positions in these areas.
Campaign Contributions Because voters often look for simple voting cues such as familiarity with the candidate's name or party identification, candidates often want to spend as much money as possible to make their name or candidacy well known. In recent years, spending in judicial races has increased dramatically. Candidates need to win two contests- their party's primary and the general election. In modern politics, this can be an expensive endeavor, and for more than a decade, Republican candidates have dominated the race for campaign contributions.
In addition to questions concerning fairness or the advantages of incumbency surround- ing campaign finances, many critics have also asked whether justice is for sale in Texas. More directly, individuals or organizations often appear before judges to whose election campaigns they have contributed money. The Texas Insiders feature puts a face on major contributors to the Texas Supreme Court candidates.

In 2009, the U.S. Supreme Court weighed in on the question of judicial bias where litigants significantly influenced the election of judges hearing their cases. In Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., Inc., the U.S. Supreme Court held that the chairman of A. T. Massey Coal had created such a question by donating $3 million to help finance the successful election of a new justice, Judge Brent Benjamin, to the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia. The possible conflict of interest arose because Massey had a $50 million civil suit appeal pending before the court; it was later decided in Massey's favor by a 3-2 vote, with the new justice voting with the majority. A 5-4 U.S. Supreme Court majority reversed and remanded the case, holding "there is a serious risk of actual bias... when a person with a personal stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing the judge on the case."Iz
Part of this debate about possible impropriety involves the battle between plaintiffs' attorneys and defense attorneys in civil cases. Texas has traditionally been a conservative, pro-business state. This perspective was usually reflected in the decisions of the judiciary, which often favored big business and professional groups (such as the medical profession). Plaintiffs' lawyers and their related interest groups have made a concerted effort in the past few decades to make the judiciary more open to consumer suits, often filed against busi- nesses, doctors, and their insurance companies. The plaintiffs' lawyers poured millions of dollars into the campaign accounts of candidates they believed would align more favorably with their perspective. Defense and business attorneys and civil law reform advocates such as Texans for Lawsuit Reform (TLR) responded with millions of dollars of their own contri- butions. These lawyers, from both vantage points, would then often appear before the very judges to whom they have given these large sums of money.

Campaign Contributors in Texas Supreme Court Elections: Following the Money
Lawyers are by far the single largest group of contributors in judicial campaigns for both trial and appellate courts, including the Texas Supreme Court, as shown in Table 9.3. Contributors to candidates running for the Texas Supreme Court gave a total of $2,651,474 in 2022. As usual, Republicans won all three positions being filled that year; no candidate running as a Democrat has been elected to the Texas Supreme Court since 1994.
Thinking about the role of elites in Texas politics
The list of top contributors to Texas Supreme Court candidates is dominated by the state's preeminent corporate defense and lobbying law firms. The top contributor was Texans for Lawsuit Reform (TLR), a business-supported group that seeks to limit the ability to bring liability suits (featured in our Texas Insiders section in Chapter 10). TLR is closely allied with the Republican Party.

Important plaintiffs' attorneys and their umbrella organization, the Texas Trial Lawyers Association, are missing from this list of top contributors. Plaintiffs' lawyers primarily represent injured workers, patients, consumers, and the insured in liability suits against corporations, insurance companies, and medical providers. Since these plaintiffs' attorneys have not believed that Democratic judicial candidates have had a realistic chance of winning in statewide contests, they tend to direct their campaign contributions to other races.
After losing a high-stakes oil and gas dispute against BP America at the Texas Supreme Court, multimillionaire Saleh Abraham set his data analysts to work. They found: "If you are a billion- dollar company represented by one of nine elite law firms, you are 5.4 times more likely to win some or all of what you seek from the justices."13
SRQ
Is there a conflict of interest when law firms represent clients before a judge that their contributions helped elect? Should judges recuse themselves, or abstain, from cases that affect their largest campaign contributors?

Clearly, the current system is quite political, and many people are critical of it for a variety of reasons. This has led to repeated attempts to reform the way Texas selects its judges or change what is permissible in campaign fundraising. In 1995, the Texas Legislature passed the Judicial Campaign Fairness Act, which places some limits on the amount candidates for statewide judicial positions may receive from individuals ($5,000), law firms ($30,000), and political action committees ($300,000); the law also limits contributions to lesser amounts for other judicial candidates.
However, it is important to note that these are limits on the amounts that candidates them- selves may receive. Outside groups may independently spend unlimited amounts advocating the election or defeat of judicial candidates. For example, the Texas Civil Justice League and the Judicial Fairness PAC advertised extensively in the 2022 election campaign season (see Image 9.6).
Image 9.6 Independent groups spend extensively in judicial campaigns, and one ad financed by them is shown here. Sample one of the ads paid for by the Judicial Fairness PAC at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6FSUi-1ELK.

Ethnic, Racial, and Gender Diversity
A major criticism of the current partisan election system involves one of its outcomes: limited ethnic, racial, and gender diversity on the bench. Figure 9.6 details the ethnic and gender profile of the state's judges. Although Anglos account for less than half (40 percent) of the state's overall population, 73 percent of the state's judges are Anglo. In contrast, only 19 percent of the state's judges are Latino, and even fewer are African American or Asian American.
Women's representation in judicial posts varies considerably across the different court lev- els. Women are close to parity on the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals and the fourteen appeals courts. However, the lower courts are more male dominated-overall, almost four- fifths (37 percent) of all Texas judges are women.

Applying What You Have Learned about Texas Courts
LO
9.5 Apply what you have learned about the Texas judiciary.
You have learned that Texas selects its judges using partisan elections in which parties nomi- nate candidates who are then elected by the state's voters. You also learned that this method for selecting judges has been criticized for various reasons and that many states have turned to other strategies to select their judges. So we asked the former chief justice of the Texas Supreme Court Wallace Jefferson to explain his views of the judicial selection process based on his practical experiences inside the judiciary.
























