210
Chapter 8
The Executive
Abranch is separated into various offices and agencies that are often beyond the governor's Ithough the Texas Constitution designates the governor as chief executive, the executive effective control. The division of Texas executive power is largely based on the Jacksonian democratic theory that most major officeholders should be elected. The legislature has some- what strengthened the governor's administrative influence over several agencies, but powerful special interest groups, bureaucrats, the legislative leadership, and the public generally prefer a decentralized government and a weak chief executive. As a result, the structure of the Texas executive branch will continue to be a hodgepodge of administratively independent entities, with no single official formally responsible for either policy initiation or implementation.
The lack of administrative authority does not mean the governor's office lacks the potential for meaningful political power. An astute, politically savvy governor can exert significant influence on both legislative and administrative policy by asserting legislative powers; man- aging media coverage; using party influence; and strategically appointing allies to boards, commissions, and the judiciary.
Long tenure and solid interest group support are also important factors in a governor's influence. A long-serving governor with the support of powerful interest groups can wield significant influence over the enactment and implementation of public policy in Texas. To be most effective, a governor must have appointed most members of administrative boards and commissions, convinced legislators that he or she will punish errant behavior, and won the support of powerful political and financial special interests.
The Governor's Office: Qualifications, Tenure, and Staff
LO 8.1 Describe the governor's office and the characteristics of the typical Texas governor.
To become governor, a candidate must meet formal or legal qualifications as well as informal requirements that are imposed by the state's political culture.
Qualifications and Elections
As is usual with elective offices, the legal requirements for becoming governor are minimal: One must be 30 years of age, an American citizen, and a resident of Texas for five consecutive years prior to running for election. Whereas the formal qualifications for governor are easily met, the informal criteria are more selective.
Ethnicity, Race, and Gender Since the Texas Revolution, all governors have been Anglos and historically most governors have been males. The only female governor of Texas before Ann Richards (1991-95) was Miriam A. Ferguson, who served for two nonconsecu- tive terms (1925-27 and 1933-35). She ran on the slogan "Two Governors for the Price of One" and did not really represent a deviation from male dominance in Texas politics, for it
was clear that her husband, former Governor James E. Ferguson (who had been impeached
in 1917 and banned from holding public office), exercised the power of the office. In reality.
Governor Richards was the first truly independent woman to serve as Texas's chief executive.
Career The typical governor will usually be successful in business or law; in fact, more than
one-half of the governors who have served since 1900 have been lawyers, although that has been
true for only two of the eight governors who have served over the past 50 years, Mark White
(1983-87) and Greg Abbott (2015-). The governor will probably have a record of elective public
service in state government or some other source of name recognition. For instance, prior to being
Copyright 2014 Cengage Leaming. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned delicated, in whole or in part. Due to clictronic rights, methand puty comment may be suppressed from the clock and Ch
Edial review has denied that any pressed tent des materially affect the veral learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right ve ational coment at any if subsoient rights restrictions respite a]


210
Chapter 8
The Executive
Abranch is separated into various offices and agencies that are often beyond the governor's Ithough the Texas Constitution designates the governor as chief executive, the executive effective control. The division of Texas executive power is largely based on the Jacksonian democratic theory that most major officeholders should be elected. The legislature has some- what strengthened the governor's administrative influence over several agencies, but powerful special interest groups, bureaucrats, the legislative leadership, and the public generally prefer a decentralized government and a weak chief executive. As a result, the structure of the Texas executive branch will continue to be a hodgepodge of administratively independent entities, with no single official formally responsible for either policy initiation or implementation.
The lack of administrative authority does not mean the governor's office lacks the potential for meaningful political power. An astute, politically savvy governor can exert significant influence on both legislative and administrative policy by asserting legislative powers; man- aging media coverage; using party influence; and strategically appointing allies to boards, commissions, and the judiciary.
Long tenure and solid interest group support are also important factors in a governor's influence. A long-serving governor with the support of powerful interest groups can wield significant influence over the enactment and implementation of public policy in Texas. To be most effective, a governor must have appointed most members of administrative boards and commissions, convinced legislators that he or she will punish errant behavior, and won the support of powerful political and financial special interests.
The Governor's Office: Qualifications, Tenure, and Staff
LO 8.1 Describe the governor's office and the characteristics of the typical Texas governor.
To become governor, a candidate must meet formal or legal qualifications as well as informal requirements that are imposed by the state's political culture.
Qualifications and Elections
As is usual with elective offices, the legal requirements for becoming governor are minimal: One must be 30 years of age, an American citizen, and a resident of Texas for five consecutive years prior to running for election. Whereas the formal qualifications for governor are easily met, the informal criteria are more selective.
Ethnicity, Race, and Gender Since the Texas Revolution, all governors have been Anglos and historically most governors have been males. The only female governor of Texas before Ann Richards (1991-95) was Miriam A. Ferguson, who served for two nonconsecu- tive terms (1925-27 and 1933-35). She ran on the slogan "Two Governors for the Price of One" and did not really represent a deviation from male dominance in Texas politics, for it
was clear that her husband, former Governor James E. Ferguson (who had been impeached
in 1917 and banned from holding public office), exercised the power of the office. In reality.
Governor Richards was the first truly independent woman to serve as Texas's chief executive.
Career The typical governor will usually be successful in business or law; in fact, more than
one-half of the governors who have served since 1900 have been lawyers, although that has been
true for only two of the eight governors who have served over the past 50 years, Mark White
(1983-87) and Greg Abbott (2015-). The governor will probably have a record of elective public
service in state government or some other source of name recognition. For instance, prior to being
Tenure, Removal, Succession, and Compensation
As in forty-seven other states, Texas governors serve a four-year term. Unlike most states, however, there is no limit on the number of terms that a governor may serve (see How Does Texas Compare). Historically, governors have served one or two terms, but recent governors have served multiple terms in office. For example, former Governor Rick Perry assumed office on December 21, 2000, replacing Governor George W. Bush, who resigned following his election as the 43rd president of the United States. Perry would go on to win gubernatorial elections in 2002, 2006, and 2010 before opting not to seek reelection in 2014. He left office on January 20, 2015, after having been governor for a state record of 14 years and 1 month, the longest-serving governor in the state's history. So far, Greg Abbott has been elected to three terms in 2014, 2018, and 2022 and is the second longest serving governor in state history. Perry and Abbott's respective long tenures in office have allowed them to accumulate a level of power that is much greater than that of previous Texas governors.
The governor may be removed from office only by impeachment by the House of Repre- sentatives and conviction by the Senate. Impeachment is bringing formal charges against a public official; it is the legislative equivalent of indictment for improper conduct in office and requires only a simple majority vote. Conviction by the Senate removes the official from office and requires a two-thirds majority.
If the governor is impeached and convicted, dies, or resigns, the lieutenant governor becomes governor and the Texas Senate then elects one of its members to serve as the acting lieutenant gover- nor until the next election. This process took place most recently in 2000 when Governor Bush was elected president. Following Bush's resignation, Lieutenant Governor Rick Perry became governor, and state senator Bill Ratliff was chosen by his colleagues to serve as the acting lieutenant governor.

Governors' Term and Term Limits
New Hampshire and Vermont elect their governors for two-year terms. While governors of the other forty-eight states serve for four-year terms, most states limit the number of terms they may serve. Many states limit the governor to two consecutive terms in office but allow a former governor to seek reelection after sitting out one term. In some states, the governor may seek reelection once, but may not serve more than two terms over a 12- or 16-year period. A few states impose a lifetime limit of two terms; the governor of Virginia may not serve consecutive terms and must sit out one term to be eligible to seek office again.
Texas is one of only thirteen states that do not limit the number of terms the governor may serve. Governor Greg Abbott is serving his third term while his predecessor, Rick
Perry, served three and a half terms as governor. Some argue an incumbent governor enjoys too many electoral advantages, such as name recognition, media coverage, fund-raising ability and patronage, to be allowed to seek unlimited reelection. They contend that unlimited terms allow governors to gain too much power as they become too cozy with interest groups and too insulated from the needs of the general public.
Others argue that term limits deprive voters of the ability to keep a governor they support in office, and that if voters believe that a particular governor is not doing a good job, then they would cast the incumbent out at the next election. Opponents of term limits also argue that experience in office gives elected officials a deeper understanding of public policy and the needs of the general public.


For Debate
* CTQ
Should Texas place limits on gubernatorial reelection like a majority of the other states, or should it trust voters to reelect the governor as many times as they wish? Why or why not?
CTO
If Texas were to place some type of limit on gubernatorial reelection, what type of limit among those used by the other states do you think would be best for Texas?

Compensation The governor's annual salary is set by the legislature. At present, it is $153,750 and stands in marked contrast to the low salaries paid to legisla- tors. Though the governor's salary is in the top quartile nationally, many elected and unelected state personnel earn noticeably more than the Texas governor.
In addition to the Texas Governor's Mansion, which serves as the official residence for governors and their families, there is an expense account to keep the residence maintained and staffed. The governor also has an extensive professional staff of assistants and advisors in the capitol building, which is vital to a modern chief executive who must carry out the far-flung duties of an increasingly powerful office.
Did You Know? According to the Texas Tribune's Government Salaries Explorer, as of April 1, 2023, there were more than 1,900 Texas government employees who earned a higher salary than Governor Greg Abbott.
Staff
The governor's increasing involvement in legislative affairs and the public's growing demands have intensified pressure on the chief executive's time and resources. The Texas governor, like all executives in modern government, depends on others for advice, information, and assistance when making decisions. A good staff is a key ingredient for successful service as governor.
Evaluating Appointees Among the most important concerns of the governor's staff are political appointments. Each year, the governor makes several hundred appointments to various boards, commissions, and executive agencies. The executive also fills newly created judicial offices and those vacated because of death or resignation. Staff evaluation of potential appointees is necessary because the governor may not personally know many of the individuals under consideration.

Legislative Liaisons Legislative assistants serve as liaisons between the office of the
governor and the legislature. Their job is to stay in contact with key legislators, committee chairs, and the legislative leadership. These assistants are, in practice, the governor's lobbyists. They keep legislators informed and attempt to persuade them to support the governor's posi- tion on legislation. Often the success of the governor's legislative program rests on the staff's abilities and political expertise.
Budget Preparation Some administrative assistants head executive offices that com- pile and write budget recommendations and manage and coordinate budget activities within the governor's office.
Communications and Scheduling Staff members manage the governor's rela-
tions with the media and public by responding to requests for interviews, distributing press releases, arranging press conferences, and maintaining the governor's presence on social media. Staff members also exercise administrative control over the governor's schedule of ceremonial and official duties.
Planning The governor is the official planning officer for the state, although coordina- tion and participation by affected state agencies are voluntary. The planning divisions also help coordinate local and regional planning between the councils of governments in an effort to bring the work of these jurisdictions into harmony with state goals. In addition, national and state funds are available through the governor's office to local units of government for comprehensive planning.

The Governor's Powers of Persuasion
LO 8.2
Analyze both the governor's powers of persuasion and the limits on them.
informal (extralegal) powers
Powers that are not stated in rules, law, or a constitution but are usually derived from formal or legal powers.
formal (legal) powers Powers that are stated in the law or the constitution.
The governor's ability to influence the making and executing of government policy depends on his or her bargaining skills, persuasiveness, and ability to broker effectively between competing interests the tools of persuasion. These are informal, or extralegal, powers of the office not stated in rules, laws or the constitution, but are largely derived from the formal, or legal, powers that are stated in the law or the constitution. They are as important as the legal powers, and the governor's ability to use informal powers can determine his or her effectiveness. Compared to governors of other states (especially other populous, industrialized states), the governor of Texas was once thought to have weak formal administrative powers. However, today, Texas governors have been able to exert substantial influence on policy formulation and even on policy execution by blending the formal and informal powers with other attributes, such as a charismatic personality, long tenure in office, political expertise, prestige, a knack for public relations and political gamesmanship, good relations with the press, supporters with political and economic strength, a favorable political climate, and simple good luck. Using these, 21st-century governors Perry and Abbott have been able to assert dominant political influence in Texas state government.

The Governor as Chief of State
The governor, as the first citizen of Texas, serves as a symbol of Texas as surely as the bluebon- net or the Alamo. A significant part of the governor's job is related to the pomp and ceremony of the office. These ceremonial duties include greeting delegations and groups at the state capitol, appearing at major sporting events such as Super Bowl LI in Houston; visiting disaster areas such as Port Aransas, Corpus Christi, and Houston after Hurricane Harvey; riding in parades; and attending county fairs and local festivals throughout the state.
Did You Know? Governor Greg Abbott's spouse, Cecilia Abbott, is the first Latina to serve as First Lady of Texas.
This ceremonial role is important because it can contrib- ute indirectly to the governor's leadership effectiveness through increased popularity and prestige. The governor also broadens the image as first citizen to that of the first family of Texas whenever possible; voters identify with the governor's family, so the gover- nor's spouse is often included in the visual enactment of the office.
Intergovernmental Function The governor performs ceremonial duties and rep- resents the state at meetings with foreign officials and other governors. She or he also serves as a member of (or appoints representatives to) numerous multistate organizations and con- ferences that work to coordinate relations between Texas and other state governments. These conferences deal with civil defense, nuclear energy, and other important matters. It is also the governor's responsibility to ask other states to extradite fugitives from Texas law and to grant or refuse like requests from other states.
Federal-State Relations In order to facilitate the governor's job of coordinating the activities of state agencies and local governments with national grant-in-aid programs, the Texas government has established an office in the nation's capital, the Texas Office of State- Federal Relations (OSFR). The governor appoints (and may remove) the OSFR director.
The governor may request federal aid when the state has suffered a disaster, a drought, or an economic calamity. As chief of state, the governor often flies over or visits a disaster area to

make a personal assessment of the damage-and also to show the victims that the governor is concerned for their welfare. Then, as a "voice of the people," the governor may make a highly publicized request for federal aid to the area, such as Governor Abbott's request for federal aid for all 254 Texas counties in the wake of the February 2021 winter storm that left millions of Texans without power and water for days and caused billions of dollars in property damage.
Governor as Party Chief
Although there are varying degrees of competition from other elected officials and from political activists, governors usually maintain the de facto leadership of their political party by virtue of their position as the state's chief executive. The governor's explicit or implicit support is highly valued by legislators seeking reelection and by politicians aspiring to statewide, legislative, judicial, or local office.
National Party Leader The Texas governor can also be a leader in national politics if so inclined. Unless the Texas governor experiences serious public relations problems, any candidate from the governor's party who seeks the nomination for president would want the support of the governor of the nation's second most populous state. During the administra- tion of Democratic Presidents Barack Obama (2009-17) and Joe Biden (2021-), the Texas governor assumed an even more prominent role than usual, as one of the most visible and influential Republican chief executives in the country.
Positions on National Issues National politics also affords the governor an oppor-
tunity to build a firm, clear image for the people back home. The governor can take positions on political issues that do not involve the Texas government and over which the governor has no direct control, but with which people can easily identify, such as foreign policy or national defense.

Legislative Tools of Persuasion
Ironically, the most influential bargaining tools that the Texas governor has are legislative. Among the governor's most important legislative powers are the power to deliver messages and rally support around a legislative agenda, the power to veto bills passed by the legislature, and the power to call special sessions. The governor must use these tools effectively in order to be successful in office.
Message Power As a constitutional requirement, the governor must deliver a State of
the State message at the beginning of each regular legislative session. This message includes
the outline for the governor's legislative program. Throughout the session, the governor may also submit messages calling for action on individual items of legislation. The receptiveness of the legislature to the various messages is influenced by the governor's popularity, the amount of favorable public opinion generated for the proposals, and the governor's political expertise. The message power to deliver the State of the State message and special messages to the legislature derives from the state constitution, but this formal power of the governor is enhanced by the visibility of the office. Through the judicious use of the mass media (an informal power), the governor can focus public attention on a bill when it might otherwise be buried in the legislative morass. To be effective, however, the governor "goes to the people" only for the legislation considered most vital to the interest of the state, to the governor's politi- cal and financial supporters, and/or to the governor's policy agenda. Overuse of the message power can dilute the impact of the governor's appeals.
Emergency Item The regular session of the Texas Legislature takes place every two years between January and late May or early June for a total of 140 days. The legislature can usually only hold a floor debate and vote on a bill during the first 60 days of the regular session if the governor has declared it to be an emergency item.' As a result, the governor often sets the legislative agenda at the start of the session when a bill will face less competition for time

and attention; he or she is able to call public attention to certain issues and signal which topics should be given highest priority that year. During Governor Abbott's February 16, 2023, State of the State Address he designated seven emergency items: cutting property taxes (using $12.3 billion of the state's $33 billion surplus for property tax relief), ending government COVID restrictions, school choice (via Education Savings Accounts), school safety, ending revolving-door bail (with a specific mention of bail practices in Harris County), enhancing border security, and addressing the fentanyl crisis.
Budget Powers The governor is designated as the chief budget officer of the state. Every other year, the various agencies and institutions submit their appropriation requests to the governor's staff and to the staff of the Legislative Budget Board. Working from these estimates, the governor and staff prepare a budget that is determined by both the state's esti- mated income and the estimated cost of program proposals. When completed, the budget is submitted to the legislature.
Veto One of the governor's most powerful formal legislative tools is the veto, a power that allows the governor to stop a bill from becoming law. After a bill has passed both houses of the legislature in identical form, it is sent to the governor. If signed, the bill becomes law; if the governor vetoes the bill, he or she issues a proclamation and returns it to the legislature with a message stating the reasons for opposition. The legislature has the constitutional power to override the governor's veto by a two-thirds vote, but in practice vetoes are usually final.

Because legislative sessions in Texas are short, many important bills are passed and sent
to the governor in the final days of the regular session. The governor is not required to take
action on any legislation for 10 days (excluding Sundays) when the legislature is in session,
or for 20 days when it is not in session. The governor can often wait until the legislature has
adjourned to veto a bill to ensure that it will not be overridden. In fact, it is so difficult to
override a veto, that only one of the 1,491 vetoes has been overridden since World War II.2
Thus, the veto gives the Texas governor a strong bargaining position with legislators.
No Pocket Veto The Texas governor lacks the pocket veto that is available to many other chief executives, including the president of the United States. The pocket veto provides that if the executive chooses to ignore legislation passed at the end of a session, it dies without ever taking effect. By contrast, if the Texas governor neither signs nor vetoes a bill, it becomes law. By not signing a bill and allowing it to become law, the governor may register a symbolic protest against the bill or some of its provisions.
Line-Item Veto The most important single piece of legislation enacted in a legislative session is the appropriations bill. If it should be vetoed in its entirety, funds for the opera- tion of the government would be cut off, and a special session would be necessary. Thus, Texas, along with most other states, permits the governor a line-item veto, which allows the governor to veto provisions related to funding for specific items or projects without killing the entire bill.
If used to its fullest potential, the line-item veto is a very effective legislative tool. Money is necessary to administer laws; therefore, by vetoing an item or a category of items, the governor can in effect kill programs or whole classes of programs. Because the appropriations bill is usually passed at the end of the session, the line-item veto is virtually absolute. The governor cannot, however, reduce the appropriation for a budgetary item, as governors in some other states may, nor can the governor employ a line-item veto for any legislation other than the appropriations bill.


Threat of a Veto A veto threat is an informal power that enhances the governor's bargaining power with legislators, enabling the governor to shape the content of legislation while it is still in the legislature. By threatening a veto while a bill is still being considered by the legislature, the governor is often able to persuade legislators to reshape the bill to meet the governor's wishes.
Both the veto and the line-item veto are negative tools that simply kill bills or programs; they do not let the governor directly shape legislation. However, by threatening to use these formal powers, the governor can often persuade the legislative supporters of a bill to change its content or face the prospect of a veto. In this way, a compromise can often be negotiated. Although the veto itself is a negative, or reactive, power, the veto threat can be used positively, or proactively, to affect the content of bills during the legislative process.
The threat of a veto can also be used to consolidate lobby support for the governor's leg- islative proposals. Lobbyists may offer to support the governor's position on legislation if the governor will agree not to veto a particular bill that is considered vital to the interests of their employers or clients.
The governor can also use this powerful informal tool of persuasion to influence bureau- crats. Bureaucrats are very active in the legislative process, often seeking increased funding for favorite programs and projects or seeking authorization to administer new programs. Because of this, the governor may be able to influence the administration of existing programs by threat- ening to withhold funds or veto bills actively supported by an agency." The agency's legislative liaison personnel (its lobbyists) may also be encouraged to support the governor's legislative program in exchange for support of agency-supported bills.

Special Sessions The constitution gives the governor exclusive power to call the legis- lature into special session and to determine the legislative subjects to be considered during the session. The legislature may, however, consider any nonlegislative subject, such as confirmation of appointments, resolutions, and impeachment, even if the governor does not include it in the call. Special sessions are limited to a 30-day duration, but the governor may call them as often as he or she wants. The governor's power to call an unlimited number of special sessions has proved effective on several occasions. For example, in 2021, in order to block Republican- authored election reform legislation, Democrats engaged in a quorum break in the Texas House (100 members are required to be present for any floor votes on legislation to occur) during the last days the regular session, with most leaving the state to avoid being compelled by Texas Rangers to return to the House floor. Governor Abbott then called a first special session for July to debate the election reform (among other items). And, when Democrats refused to provide a quorum to allow the House to meet during that first special session, Abbott called yet a second special session for August, for which Democrats finally relented and provided a quorum in the House. The election reform legislation (Senate Bill 1) passed out of both chambers on August 31, 2021, and was signed into law by Abbott on September 7, 2021.
Often when coalitions of legislators and lobbyists request a special session so that a "critical issue" can be brought before the legislature, other coalitions of legislators and interests oppose consideration of the issue and, therefore, oppose calling the special session. Calling a special session can create a dilemma for the governor because groups whose priority legislation was not passed during the regular session can feel slighted if their issue is not among the topics placed on the special session agenda by the governor.
Because there is seldom any legislation that does not hurt some and help others, the gover- nor has an opportunity to use the special session as a valuable bargaining tool. The governor may or may not call a special session on the basis of some concession or support to be delivered in the future. The supporters and opponents of legislation may also have to bargain with the governor over the inclusion or exclusion of specific policy proposals for the special session. Of course, this position may not be open to negotiation if the governor has strong feelings about the proposal and is determined to call (or not to call) a special session. If the governor does think that an issue is critical, the attention of the entire state can be focused on the proposal during the special session much more effectively than during the regular session.

Special Sessions The constitution gives the governor exclusive power to call the legis- lature into special session and to determine the legislative subjects to be considered during the session. The legislature may, however, consider any nonlegislative subject, such as confirmation of appointments, resolutions, and impeachment, even if the governor does not include it in the call. Special sessions are limited to a 30-day duration, but the governor may call them as often as he or she wants. The governor's power to call an unlimited number of special sessions has proved effective on several occasions. For example, in 2021, in order to block Republican- authored election reform legislation, Democrats engaged in a quorum break in the Texas House (100 members are required to be present for any floor votes on legislation to occur) during the last days the regular session, with most leaving the state to avoid being compelled by Texas Rangers to return to the House floor. Governor Abbott then called a first special session for July to debate the election reform (among other items). And, when Democrats refused to provide a quorum to allow the House to meet during that first special session, Abbott called yet a second special session for August, for which Democrats finally relented and provided a quorum in the House. The election reform legislation (Senate Bill 1) passed out of both chambers on August 31, 2021, and was signed into law by Abbott on September 7, 2021.
Often when coalitions of legislators and lobbyists request a special session so that a "critical issue" can be brought before the legislature, other coalitions of legislators and interests oppose consideration of the issue and, therefore, oppose calling the special session. Calling a special session can create a dilemma for the governor because groups whose priority legislation was not passed during the regular session can feel slighted if their issue is not among the topics placed on the special session agenda by the governor.
Because there is seldom any legislation that does not hurt some and help others, the gover- nor has an opportunity to use the special session as a valuable bargaining tool. The governor may or may not call a special session on the basis of some concession or support to be delivered in the future. The supporters and opponents of legislation may also have to bargain with the governor over the inclusion or exclusion of specific policy proposals for the special session. Of course, this position may not be open to negotiation if the governor has strong feelings about the proposal and is determined to call (or not to call) a special session. If the governor does think that an issue is critical, the attention of the entire state can be focused on the proposal during the special session much more effectively than during the regular session.

Board of Education can be either elected or appointed, it too is elected. Moreover, the Texas Legislature, by statute, has systematically assumed executive functions such as budgeting and auditing. It has also established an independently elected Commissioner of Agriculture and cre- ated a multitude of boards and commissions to administer state laws that are independent of the governor's direct control. Although the members of these commissions are usually appointed by the governor, their terms are staggered, and it may be several years before the governor's appointees constitute a majority of a board or commission. Boards and commissions perform such functions as hiring and firing agency directors and establishing general agency policies.
Appointive Powers An effective governor will use the power of appointment to the maximum. The governor directly appoints some state executives, such as the secretary of state. When vacancies occur in elected executive and judicial positions, the governor appoints someone to fill the unexpired term until the next election.
The power to fill vacancies gives the governor some power over the courts. It is not uncommon for judges to retire or resign before the end of their term. The governor is empowered to fill these vacancies with the appointed judges, who then enjoy the advantages provided by incumbency in the next election, including enhanced name recognition and fund-raising ability.

Probably the most important appointments that the governor makes are to the independent boards and commissions. The members of these boards establish general administrative and regulatory policy for state agencies or institutions and choose the top administrators to carry out these policies.
The governor's ability to affect board policy through appointments is not immediate; however, as the boards are usually appointed for fixed, six-year staggered terms that expire at two-year inter- vals. The governor may fill vacancies in an unexpired term, but may not remove a commissioner appointed by a previous governor. Since only one-third of these positions become vacant every two years (barring resignation or death), first-term governors will have appointed a majority of most boards only in the second half of their term, and only after six years in office are governors able to gain complete control of boards and commissions. Governors Perry and Abbott have been able to dominate state boards and commissions only because they have been reelected and served long tenures in office. Figure 8.3 shows how these overlapping terms initially limit the governor's ability to control the board-and-commission system and the state agencies they govern.
Interest groups in Texas are vitally concerned with seeing that friendly appointees are selected to serve on these boards and commissions. Industry interest groups are particularly eager to have an industry advocate (often an ex-lobbyist or industry executive) appointed to the board that oversees and sets policy for an agency that governs their industry. Appointment of a
Figure 8.3 Overlapping Terms at the TCEQ
This figure illustrates the effect of staggered terms on the governor's powers. Board or commission members serve six-year terms that expire at two-year intervals. Early in his first term, Governor Abbott appointed one TCEQ commissioner, Jon Niermann; two years later, he appointed a second member of the commission Emily Lindley. He had to get reelected to appoint the third member, Bobby Janecka, giving his appointees full control of the agency. In the meantime, the TCEQ was partly controlled by his predecessor's appointees.

The Governor's Campaign Contributors Appointed to Office
Since beginning his first campaign for government, Governor Abbott has raised more money from donors than any other governor in American history. Approximately one-quarter of all his appointees to state office have been campaign contributors; Table 8.1 shows ten of the most notable Abbott contributors who have been appointed to major boards and commissions.
When Texas developer George McMahan said, "You make a large donation to the governor, and in turn you are eligible for appointment" to a university governing board, the Abbott campaign promptly returned his $10,000 check. Craig McDonald, executive director of the watchdog group Texans for Public Justice, said, "Abbott stockpiling that money is just a reflection of a one-party state that seems to protect the donor class in Texas. It says more about how the system works and is bigger than Greg Abbott himself."
Abbott's spokeswoman, Ciara Matthews, responded by correctly pointing out that more than 70 percent of Governor Abbott's appointees have never contributed to him. Of course, many of Abbott's appointees have

served with distinction and there is no direct proof that any of these donor-appointees ever made political contributions with the intent of buying a state appointment.
Nevertheless, there remains the appearance of "pay for play" politics and, as a result, the Texas House passed HB 3305, a bill introduced by San Antonio Republican Lyle Larson to allow the governor only to appoint political donors who contributed less than $2,500 in the previous year. However, the bill died in the Senate in 2017, and with it, the effort to reform the appointment process in Texas.
SRQ
It is common for governors and even presidents to appoint their loyal supporters and allies to office because they want appointees who share their agenda in making and executing policy. Should the law limit elected chief executives' ability to put "their people" into important decision- making positions when there is so much potential for conflict of interest in the appointment process? Before answering, watch the video at https:// www.kxan.com/investigations/money- politics-and-patient-safety-abbott- donors-on-texas-medical-board/.

consumer advocate could disturb the close relationship that usually exists between an industry and its governing agency. can also be competing interest groups within one industry that may bargain indi-
There vidually with the governor for an appointee who is favorable to their particular viewpoint. Thus, an appointment to important boards often results in intense lobbying by special interest groups, which conversely gives the governor opportunities to develop support for policies and to help secure funds for future political campaigns.
Senators may also influence appointments from their districts as a result of senatorial courtesy, which is a tradition allowing a senator to reject the governor's appointment of a political enemy from the senator's district. Other senators show their courtesy to the dis- gruntled senator by refusing to confirm the appointment of his or her political enemy to a
board or commission.
Removal Powers Although the governor possesses broad appointive power over boards and commissions, the governor's powers of removal are limited. He or she may remove mem- bers of the executive office and a few minor administrators. The governor may also remove, for cause and with the consent of two-thirds of the senate, his or her own appointments to boards and commissions. Because of these restrictions on their removal powers, governors are very careful to appoint board members who share their political viewpoints and policy perspectives whenever they have the opportunity.

Law Enforcement Powers The governor has limited law enforcement authority because law enforcement is primarily decentralized among local authorities under the juris- diction of county sheriffs and constables (who are elected) and city chiefs of police (who are appointed by city officials). Criminal acts are prosecuted either by elected district or county attorneys or by appointed city attorneys. The judiciary, which tries and sentences criminals, is elective (except for municipal judges, who are appointed by city officials).
Nevertheless, the governor does have some law enforcement power. The governor appoints the five-member Public Safety Commission for six-year staggered terms and has the power to issue directives to state law enforcement officers within the Department of Public Safety, including the Texas Rangers and state troopers in the Highway Patrol.
Military Powers The governor is commander-in-chief of the state militia, which con- sists of the Texas National Guard and the Texas State Guard. The governor appoints (and can remove) an adjutant general who exercises administrative control over both units. The Texas National Guard comprises the Texas Army National Guard (19,000 troops) and the Texas Air Guard (3,000 troops) and is funded primarily by the U.S. government. It is required to meet federal standards and may be called to active duty by the president. In the event the Texas National Guard is nationalized, command passes from the governor to the president.
The Texas State Guard was established during World War II and serves as a backup organi- zation in the event that the National Guard is called to active duty by the president. It cannot be called into active duty by the federal government, and its approximately 2,000 members receive no pay unless mobilized by the governor.
The governor may declare a state of emergency (usually after a riot or a natural disaster), issue executive orders for these emergencies, and send these guard units to keep the peace and protect public property. The governor may employ the militia, according to Article 4, Section 7, of the Texas Constitution "to execute the laws of the state, to suppress insurrection, and to repel invasions."

Emergency Powers The Texas Disaster Act of 1975 details the broad emergency powers available to the governor in the case of a disaster, and Governor Abbott has used this authority to substantially expand the power of his office like no other governor in recent history.

The Texas Disaster Act was designed primarily for natural disasters such as a hurricane, flood, tornado, or fire, but it also contemplates the need for emergency powers in other contexts such as an industrial accident, civil unrest, or epidemic. The law allows the governor to prepare for and then respond to any disaster, with the governor solely empowered to declare a disaster at his or her discretion, with the only constraint being that the declaration is valid for only 30 days. However, the governor can renew this declaration for 30-day periods indefinitely as long as in the opinion of the governor the operative conditions that created the need for it still exist.
The Disaster Act empowers the governor to respond to a disaster by issuing executive orders and proclamations as well as drafting regulations that have the force of law. Governor Abbott used his emergency powers to confront the COVID-19 pandemic in controversial ways. Many conservatives, such as members of the Texas Freedom Caucus, argued that Abbott's executive orders mandating Texans wear masks, requiring private businesses to remain closed or operate at reduced capacity, and extending the early voting period for the 2020 general election exceeded the authority granted by the Disaster Act and represented overreach because they imposed too many personal and business restrictions or violated existing law. Many liberals, such as the Democratic mayors of Austin and Houston and the Democratic county judges of Harris and Travis Counties, contended that city and county governments should have been allowed greater discretion in mandating the use of masks and requiring businesses to remain closed in order to deal with the pandemic according to specific local needs. In March 2021, Governor Abbott responded to the influx of migrants along the Texas border by launching Operation Lone Star and later issuing a disaster declaration directing the Department of Public Safety to use available resources to enforce all applicable laws to prevent criminal activity along the border, including criminal trespassing, smuggling, and human trafficking. At its peak, as many as 10,000 state military personnel were also dispatched to the area and at least 160,000 migrants were arrested primarily for trespassing and other minor offenses (see Image 8.2).

Clemency Powers The 1876 Texas Constitution granted the governor virtually unlimited power to pardon, parole, and grant reprieves to convicted criminals; these are known as clemency powers. Several governors were very generous with these powers, resulting in a 1936 constitutional amendment that established the Board of Pardons and Paroles. Many of the powers that had been held by the governor were transferred to the board, which grants, revokes, and determines the conditions for parole and makes clemency recommendations to the governor. However, the gover- nor appoints the board's members and can grant less clemency than recommended by the board, but not more; nor can the governor interfere in the parole process by blocking early releases from prison. The governor can postpone executions but only for 30 days.
The Texas Administration
LO 8.3 Analyze the structure and characteristics of the Texas bureaucracy.
The Texas administration or bureaucracy is the part of the executive branch that actually administers government policies and programs. Although nonelected employees handle day- to-day operations of the government, implement government policies, and provide services to the public, the various divisions of the executive branch are usually headed by a single elected administrator, an appointed executive, or a multimember board or commission that may be appointed, elected, or ex officio.
The most distinctive characteristic of the Texas administration, however, is that no one is really in charge of the administrative apparatus as a whole. As in many other states, the administration of laws in Texas is fragmented into several elective and numerous appointive positions. Although the principle of hierarchy exists within each department, the formal organization of the Texas bureaucracy follows the basic administrative principle of hierarchy only as far as the elected administrator or appointed board. The Texas bureaucracy can be visualized as approximately 200 separate entities, each following its own path, often oblivious to the goals and ambitions of other agencies.

Elected Executives and the Plural Executive System
The constitutional and statutory requirement that several administrators (in addition to the governor) be elected was a deliberate effort to decentralize administrative power and prevent any one official from gaining control of the government.
Lieutenant Governor The lieutenant governor is elected for a four-year term, with no limit on the number of terms that may be served. Although technically part of the executive branch, most of the lieutenant governor's power actually comes from serving as the powerful president of the Texas Senate. In that position, the lieutenant governor is an ex officio chair of the Legislative Budget Board and of the Legislative Council. The lieutenant governor is also a member of the Legislative Audit Committee and, if he or she desires, can exercise considerable personal influence on the Sunset Advisory Commission and the Legislative Criminal Justice Board. These legislative boards and commissions are not part of the executive branch, but they can have major influence on it as they conduct continuing reviews of administrative policies and make recommendations to the legislature.
Attorney General The attorney general is elected for a four-year term, with no limit on the number of terms that may be served. Holding one of the four most powerful offices in Texas government, the attorney general is the lawyer for all officials, boards, and agencies in state

government. The legal functions of the office include assisting in child support enforcement, antitrust actions, Medicaid fraud investigation, crime victim compensation, consumer protection, and other civil actions concerning insurance, banking, and securities. A broad spectrum of the state's business-oil and gas, law enforcement, envi- ronmental protection, highways, transportation, and chari- table trusts, to name only a few-is included under the overall jurisdiction of the attorney general.
The attorney general performs two major functions for the state. One is to give an attorney general's opinion, which is an interpretation of the constitution, statutory laws, or administrative rules. As the state's chief lawyer, the attorney general advises his or her cli- ent. In the absence of a prior judicial interpretation, the attorney general has the power to interpret law or to give an opinion as to whether or not a law or practice conflicts with other laws, or with the Texas or U.S. constitutions. Although these advisory opinions are technically not legally binding, they carry great weight. If state officials ignore these opinions, the attorney gen- eral will not defend them in court.

Government officials at all levels may request an opinion from the attorney general and, although they are not legally binding, government officials usually fol- low them. The attorney general's opinion is normally requested only after the legal staff of another agency or

official has been unable to reach a decision. The requests usually concern difficult questions, and several staff attorneys general consider each question. Only agencies and officials may request these opinions, and then only for official business.
A legislator may request an attorney general's opinion during the legislative session (some- times merely to delay, and thus help kill legislation). The vagueness of laws and, particularly, the ambiguity of the Texas Constitution require the attorney general to give numerous opin- ions each year.
The second major function of the attorney general is to represent the state and its govern- ment in both civil and criminal litigation. The attorney general represented the state in several suits defending the state's legislative districting system and photo ID requirements for voters while challenging the federal government on the Affordable Care Act requirement that indi- viduals have health insurance (the individual mandate provision). More recently, the attorney general has turned attention to other matters such as challenging the Biden Administration's attempts to reverse immigration policies adopted by the Trump Administration. Paxton also sued the Biden Administration to block it from enforcing workplace protections for LGBTQ+ employees.
The attorney general also represents Texas in legal conflicts with other states such as bound- ary disputes with Louisiana and Oklahoma. The attorney general enforces business regulations by bringing suits against corporations for antitrust, consumer protection, or other regulatory violations. However, the attorney general's criminal power is relatively narrow because the primary responsibility for criminal prosecution in Texas lies with the locally elected district and county attorneys.

Comptroller of Public Accounts The
comptroller (usually pronounced "controller") is elected for a four-year term, with no limit on the number of terms that may be served. The functions of the comp- troller's office encompass, either directly or indirectly, almost all financial activities of state government. The comptroller is the chief tax collector and the chief pre- audit accounting officer in the Texas government. The comptroller manages state deposits and investments and pays warrants on state accounts in his or her capacity as the state's chief treasurer. The comptroller also provides information on spending and debt at the state and local level, supports state economic development efforts, man- ages the state's college education funds, and coordinates the state's procurement system.
The comptroller's most important constitutional duty is to certify the state's approximate biennial revenue. The constitution requires a balanced budget, and the state legislature may not appropriate more funds than are anticipated as income for any two-year period. The comptroller also certifies the financial condition of the state at the close of each fiscal year. Any surplus funds can give the governor and legislature fiscal flexibility for tax cuts or increased appropriations without increasing taxes. You will learn more about the comptroller's duties in Glenn Hegar's essay later in this chapter.

Commissioner of Agriculture The commis-
sioner of agriculture is elected for a four-year term, with no limit on the number of terms that may be served. The commissioner oversees the Texas Department of Agricul- ture (TDA). The TDA was created by statute in 1907 and is responsible for the administration of all laws as well as research, educational, and regulatory activities relat- ing to agriculture. The duties of the department include checking the accuracy of the scanners at grocery stores, certifying organically produced products, determining and promoting Texas agricultural products in national and also administers the Texas Agricultural Finance Authority, rest loans to businesses that produce, process, market, and . And, the TDA administers the National School Lunch and Breakfast programs in Texas.
Like the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the TDA is charged with administering laws for both consumer and labor protection. This is a classic example of an agency with two contradictory constituencies, and at times conflicting interests, being given the function of protecting each interest from the other. A conflict of interest between these potentially incompatible groups is almost inevitable.

Commissioner of the General Land Office The commissioner of the General Land Office is elected for a four-year term, with no limit on the num- ber of terms that may be served. Principal duties of the commissioner are managing and collecting income from rentals and leases for state-owned lands; awarding oil, gas, and hard-mineral leases for exploration and production on state lands; and leasing mineral interests in the state's riverbeds and tidelands, including bays, inlets, and off- shore areas within 10.35 miles (three marine leagues) of the Texas coast. The commissioner also watches over the Alamo, preserves historic archives, handles federal disas- ter relief grants for housing and infrastructure recovery, and enforces the Texas Open Beaches Act to ensure that the public continues to have free and unfettered access to Texas beaches, defined as the point between the water and the normal high tide line.
The land commissioner serves ex officio on several boards, as is the case with many officials, and chairs the important Veterans Land and the School Land boards, whose programs are administered by the General Land Office. (Ex officio members hold their positions because they hold some other elective or appointed office.)
The School Land Board oversees approximately 13 mil- lion acres of public land and mineral rights properties, including the Gulf Coast beaches and bays and "sub- merged" lands up to 10.35 miles out into the Gulf of Mex- ico. The lease and mineral income from these public lands varies with the production and price of oil and natural gas, but revenues from the leases, rents, and royalties from the public lands are dedicated to the Permanent School Fund. Interest and dividend income from this fund are used to

Appointed Executives
Besides the executives that voters directly elect, several executives are appointed by the gover- nor. In many states, the governor appoints the heads of most state agencies, but in Texas only a few agency heads answer directly to the governor. As shown in Figure 8.4, directly appointed executives include the secretary of state, the adjutant general, the health and human services commissioner, the insurance commissioner, and the education commissioner.
Secretary of State Appointed by the governor, with confirmation by the senate, the secretary of state serves at the pleasure of the governor. The secretary is keeper of the Seal of the State and is the chief election officer for Texas, administering Texas's election laws, assisting local election officials, and receiving state election results. The secretary of state's office also serves as a repository for official, business, and commercial records filed with the office; publishes gov- ernment rules and regulations; and commissions public notaries. For the past twenty years, the secretary of state has also served as the governor's liaison for Texas border and Mexican affairs and as the Texas state's chief international protocol officer at international and diplomatic events.

Adjutant General Appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate for a two-year term, the adjutant general is the state's top-ranking military officer and exercises administrative jurisdiction over the Texas National Guard and the Texas State Guard.
Health and Human Services Commissioner The executive director of the Health and Human Services Commission is appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate. The commissioner heads the Texas Health and Human Services System, an umbrella agency or super-agency that oversees and manages several major health and welfare departments.
The director of the commission is granted extensive administrative and policy-making authority over the departments. The power within the commission clearly rests with the direc- tor, who reports directly to the governor. When the 78th Legislature created this structure in 2003, it gave the governor direct administrative control and created one of the few cabinet- style organizations in Texas government.
Insurance Commissioner The commissioner of the Texas Department of Insurance is directly appointed by the governor for a two-year fixed term, subject to senate confirmation. The department monitors and regulates the Texas insurance industry. It provides consumer information, monitors corporate solvency, prosecutes violators of insurance law, licenses agents and investigates complaints against them, develops statistics for rate determination, and regu- lates specific insurance lines such as property, liability, and life.

Commissioner of Education The commissioner is appointed by the governor with consent of the senate to serve as the state's principal executive officer for education. The com- missioner manages the day-to-day operations of the Texas Education Agency. With a number of assistant and associate commissioners and professional staff, the commissioner carries out the regulations and policies established by the legislature and the State Board of Education concerning public school programs.
Boards and Commissions
Approximately 200 elected, appointed, or ex officio boards and commissions supervise state agencies. Their members may be salaried or only reimbursed for expenses. There are also considerable differences in their political power.
Generally speaking, the most important boards are those concerned with chartering or regulating the business, industrial, and financial powers within the state. Power is also mea- sured by the number of people affected by the board's decisions or the size of its agency's appropriations. These are only general measures of power, however, because a relatively minor licensing board such as the Texas Medical Board could be the most important agency in state government to a physician whose license is about to be revoked.
Elective Boards Elective boards include the Texas Railroad Commission and the Texas State Board of Education.

Texas Railroad Commission One of the most important state regulatory boards is the Railroad Commission, a constitutionally authorized elective board whose three members serve for overlapping six-year terms. The current Railroad Commission members are Wayne Christian (with a term running from 2023 to 2029), Christi Craddick (2019 to 2025), and Jim Wright (2021 to 2027). The governor fills vacancies on the board, and these appointees serve until the next general election, at which time they may win election to the board in their own right.
The board is politically partisan and its members must first win their party's nomination before being elected. The chair position is rotated so that each member becomes the chair during the last two years of his or her term. Since Christi Craddick's term ends in 2025, she is serving as chair between 2023 and 2025. This forces any candidate who is challenging an incumbent commissioner to run against the chair of the commission.
The Railroad Commission was established in 1891 during the administration of Governor Jim Hogg as a populist reform to protect Texas citizens from unfair railroad practices. Its powers were soon expanded to regulate intrastate wheeled carriers, and in 1917, the oil and gas pipelines were added, followed soon after by the authority to regulate oil well drilling and production. The authority to regulate railroads and motor vehicles was gradually stripped away, and in 1994 the Texas Legislature transferred the commission's remaining motor and rail carrier responsibilities to the departments of transportation and public safety.
The commission's duties today are concerned only with the regulation of natural gas utili- ties, oil and gas pipelines, oil and gas drilling, and pumping activities. It is also responsible for regulation of waste disposal by the oil and gas industry and the protection of both surface and subsurface water supplies from oil- or gas-related residues. Its powers over the petroleum industry have historically made the Texas Railroad Commission one of the most powerful state regulatory bodies in the United States.
Texas State Board of Education The State Board of Education (SBOE) is elected to serve as the policy-making body for Texas public schools. Members of the State Board of Education are elected in partisan elections to four-year overlapping terms in 15 single-member

Appointed Boards Appointed boards vary greatly in terms of importance, admin- istrative power, and salary. The members of these boards, who are usually unsalaried, set the policies for their agencies and appoint their own chief administrators. The governor, with the consent of the senate, usually appoints board members, but because of the usual practice of appointing members to staggered terms, up to six years may lapse before a governor fills a board with his or her appointees.
Board appointees are often representatives of groups that have an economic interest in the rules and policies of the board. Appointments may be either a reward for political support or an attempt to balance competing interest groups whose economic well-being is affected by board rules and policies.
Figure 8.5 on page 231 uses the example of the Department of Public Safety to show that this kind of board and commission system means that the governor does not appoint the actual administrator who manages an agency on a day-by-day basis. Such a system adds another layer of bureaucracy between the elected chief executive and agencies that should be responsible to the public.
Another example of an appointed board that has become quite powerful in recent years is the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). It operates under three commissioners who are appointed by the governor for six-year overlapping terms. The TCEQ is the primary environmental regulator for the state, overseeing cleanups, permitting industrial plants, and writing rules to govern most aspects of the Texas environment. Some of the TCEQ's responsibilities include regulating waste disposal and enforcing air-quality and drinking-water standards.
Also among the most important and influential appointed boards are the Public Utility Commission of Texas, the Texas Department of Transportation, the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, the Texas Board of Criminal Justice, the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, and the Texas Water Development Board. In fact, most state agencies are run by appointed boards and commissions. Table 8.2 on page 232 provides additional examples of appointed boards and commissions.

Ex Officio Boards Numerous boards have memberships that are completely or partly ex officio-that is, boards whose members are automatically assigned because they hold some other position. There are two basic reasons for creating such boards. One is that when travel to the state capital in Austin was expensive and time-consuming, it seemed logical to establish a board whose members were already in Austin. Another reason is that subject-matter expertise on the part of the ex officio members is assumed.
The Texas Bond Review Board is an example of an ex officio board. It has four ex officio members: the governor, lieutenant governor, speaker of the house, and comptroller of public accounts. It reviews and approves all bonds and other long-term debt of state agencies and universities. It also engages in various other functions pertaining to state and local long- term debt.
A number of agency boards have some ex officio members. The Texas Appraiser Licensing and Certification Board (nine members, one ex officio) and the Texas Racing Commission (nine members, two ex officio) are examples of such boards.

Characteristics of Bureaucracy
Although bureaucracy is often thought of as being exclusive to government, it is also common to churches, colleges, corporations, and foundations. Bureaucracies develop wherever human beings organize themselves to systematically accomplish goals, and in the process, lose some flexibility and efficiency. This discussion concentrates on government bureaucracies, especially those in Texas government.
Size The complexities of twenty-first-century society, together with increased demands of government at all levels, have resulted in a dramatic increase in the number of people employed by public agencies. Large bureaucracies have become the target of some scorn from those who have simply lost confidence in our government; some special interest groups, for their own reasons, criticize public employees as a means of discrediting specific government programs. There is, however, a legitimate concern that government agencies need to be made more effi- cient and accountable to the public.
From time to time, various public officials attempt to systematically streamline both
national and state bureaucracies and to make them more efficient and receptive to the wishes
of policy makers. These attempts may or may not have positive results, but their level of suc-
cess varies widely and is based largely on the expectations, perceptions, and political ideology
of the reviewer.

Privatization One reform designed to streamline bureaucracy has been privatization, which is the hiring of private contractors to perform government services and government functions. Since the 1980s, there has been an increase in privatization throughout the country as governments have turned to the private sector for a wide range of services. Texas has priva- tized some of its prisons and highways and has experimented with using private companies to determine eligibility for social service programs. Many Texans have advocated using publicly funded vouchers to subsidize private school attendance.
Conservative, pro-business citizens often support privatization, arguing that contracting with private businesses to provide traditional public services both increases efficiency and reduces the size, power, and cost of government. They believe that private enterprise is inher- ently more effective and efficient than the public sector, and that current agencies lack the forces of the profit motive and competition that energize the private marketplace.
Skeptics of privatization argue that private businesses are profiteering at public expense because they are likely to "cut corners" on services to improve their "bottom line." Opponents also contend that private businesses are not accountable to the public because their internal operations are not as well publicized as government activities.
Opponents suspect that political contacts and campaign contributions "grease the wheels"
for contractors and that a new kind of spoils system is developing. Unlike the historic spoils
system in which elected officials hired campaign workers as public employees, today's new
spoils system is based on the practice of contract spoils, or contract patronage, in which
politicians award contracts to their political supporters and contributors in the business com-
munity. Although the contract patronage system is not new, critics believe that it has become
a major political reason for support of the privatization movement. Critics have dubbed this
practice "crony capitalism."
Hierarchy All bureaucracies are formally characterized as hierarchies, structures in which several employees report to a higher administrator who reports to higher authorities until eventually all report to the single individual with ultimate authority. Theoretically, formal authority and directives flow down through the chain of command to lower levels and information filters up through channels from lower-level employees in the field to the top.


A framework of rigid rules and regulations formally assigns authority to various levels and defines the relationship between those individual bureaucrats who are of nearly equal rank.
A model hierarchy is similar to the military chain of command for the U.S. Army. The president, as the commander-in-chief, is at the top and outranks the secretary of defense, who outranks the secretary of the army, who outranks all the generals, who in turn outrank all the colonels, and so on, down to the new private (E-1) who is outranked by everybody. Actually, a hierarchy seldom functions according to its organizational chart. Usually, it can be influenced at all levels by legislators, the chief executive, interest groups, and other bureaucrats regardless of the formal lines of authority.
Although individual units within the Texas government are hierarchically organized, the state's overall bureaucracy is not a true hierarchy for the very reason that the final authority is not centralized in a single executive. As shown in Figure 8.6 on the following page, hierarchy is evident within the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, but there are no direct lines of authority and communication from the governor to the department.
Ironically, the governor is elected by the people to be the chief executive; however, anyone in this position has little direct authority little direct authority over most administrators. Nevertheless, the governor's authority to appoint the members of most boards and commis- sions, together with close personal ties to powerful special interest groups, makes her or him an important player in shaping the direction of independent agencies.

Neutrality Administration of the laws in a "neutral" fashion-the separation of politics and administration has long been an aim of reformers in American government. Ideally, elected public officials should establish and define a program's priorities, goals, or services. Administrators should then administer the law efficiently and equally to all, irrespective of ethnicity, race, religion, income, gender or other characteristics.
The federal government took the lead in bureaucratic reform when it established a strong civil service (or merit) system, an employment system using competitive examinations or objective measures of qualifications for hiring and promoting employees. The spoils sys- tem-government employment and promotion based on political support was replaced by a merit system.
Many states have also adopted a merit system of public employment. However, Texas never implemented systematic statewide civil service reform; it still depends on a spoils or patronage system of public employment. Elected officials in Texas appoint major campaign supporters to top-level positions, which raises the potential for conflicts of interest and has resulted in criticism of crony capitalist practices in Austin from both the left and the right.
Texas attempted a different way to depoliticize the state bureaucracy by establishing the independent board and commission system discussed earlier, which tries to insulate the bureaucracy from the legislature and the governor, who are elected and hence political by definition. The board appoints a chief executive officer to manage the department and see to the administration of public policy. Administrative power is thus "removed from politics" and the governor is denied direct executive control over the state bureaucracy.
Local governments in Texas have attempted to accomplish similar goals by nonpartisan elections for city officials and special district boards. Most cities have also adopted the council-manager form of government in which an unelected "professional" manager super- vises city departments, and in school districts a "professional" superintendent administers the public schools.
With these safeguards, reformers believed that administrators could and would treat every- one equally and fairly, simply carrying out the policies of the elected officials. However, the theory of executive neutrality is naive, for public administration cannot be separated from politicsit is politics!

Expertise Individual bureaucrats should have an understanding of their jobs and the effects of their decisions on others. Students of administration have concluded that this can be accomplished by defining the duties of the job and the limit of its authority. Thus, individual bureaucrats, through training and experience in specific job classifica- tions, become experts in specialized areas of administration. Ideally, the result will be a more knowledgeable and efficient administration. Expertise is also a major source of bureaucratic power.
A power inherent in any professional bureaucracy stems from administrators' abilities to shape public policy because of their knowledge of a given subject. Policy-making officials such as the legislature and governor are seldom as informed in policy-making areas as admin- istrative personnel, who have often built a career in a single area of government activity. Policy-making officials, whether appointed or elected, may find themselves forced to rely on government employees for advice regarding both content and procedure. Generally seen by the public as only administrators, they are often important players in the conceptualization, promotion, and enactment of public policy.

The Bureaucracy, Politics, and Public Policy
LO
8.4 Analyze the political relationships among executive agencies, the public, interest groups, and elected officials.
Each attempt to depoliticize the bureaucracy has only resulted in one kind of politics being substituted for another. Most political observers agree that the Texas bureaucracy influences public policy and cannot, in fact, be separated from politics. Administration is "in politics" because it operates within a political environment and must find political support from some- where if it is to accomplish goals, gain appropriations, or even survive. The result of strong political support for an agency is increased size, jurisdiction, influence, and prestige. A less successful agency may experience reduced appropriations, static or reduced employment, nar- rowed administrative jurisdiction, and possibly extinction. Where, then, does a unit of the bureaucracy look when seeking the political support so necessary for its bureaucratic well- being? It may look to clientele interest groups, the legislature, the chief executive, and the public. Political power also comes from factors within the bureaucracy, such as control of information and flexibility in the interpretation and administration of laws.
Clientele Groups
The most natural allies for an agency are its constituent or clientele interest groups-the groups that are directly affected by agency programs. The agency reciprocates by protecting its clients within the administration. Examples of close-knit alliances at the national level are defense contractors and the U.S. Department of Defense, agribusiness and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and drug manufacturers and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. In Texas, some of the closer alliances are highway contractors and the Texas Department of Transporta- tion; oil and gas producers, processors, and distributors and the Texas Railroad Commission; private utility companies and the Public Utilities Commission of Texas; and the Texas Medical Association and the Texas Medical Board.
The Agency-Clientele Alliance The agency and its clientele groups are often allied from the agency's beginning, and this alliance continues to grow and mature as mutual convenience, power, and prosperity increase. Economic and political ties are cemented by mutual self-interest. Agencies and clients share information, have common attitudes and goals, exchange employees, and lobby the legislature together.

Mutual accommodation becomes accepted, and the clientele groups often speak of "our
agency" and spend considerable time and money lobbying for it. The agency reciprocates by
protecting its clients within the administration. Since neither the bureaucracy nor the special
interests are single entities, there is competition between special interests and agencies for
appropriations, as both seek allies in the legislative branch.
Ties do not evaporate with retirement or electoral defeat, and many former administrators and legislators work for special interests as lobbyists, consultants, and employees. State employ- ees know from the beginning that, in time, employment may be available from deep-pocketed special interests. This creates a revolving door of employees of special interest groups who move back and forth from special interest employment to public service. This rotation of employees helps the interests influence public policy and is a practice that casts a shadow of suspicion over the policy-making process. In this environment, legislators, administrators, and regulators often become promoters of the industry. At an extreme is agency capture, in which an agency created to regulate an industry becomes controlled by the very industry it is supposed to regu- late, to the detriment of the public interest.
The Governor The need of administrative agencies for the governor's support depends on the extent of the governor's formal and informal powers and how successful the agency has been in finding other powerful political allies.
Even when an executive has extensive administrative powers, as the U.S. president does, most agencies have considerable independence. In Texas, where the executive branch is

decentralized and the governor has few direct administrative powers, administrative auton- omy is increased. Regardless, agencies still need the support of the governor as he or she can influence the legislature when it considers appropriations bills and other matters that could impact an agency. The governor's line-item veto can also seriously affect an agency's funding. The governor's cooperation is also essential for an agency because of the chief executive's power to appoint policy-making boards and commissions. Because an agency's interests are usually similar to those of its constituency, both want the governor to appoint board members who will advance their mutual political goals.
Public Policy and the Iron Texas Star
The explanation of how public policy is made and implemented is a complex endeavor. Teachers and writers often use models as a means of simplification to explain the process. One such model, the "Iron Texas Star," is depicted in Figure 8.7. It illustrates the relation- ships between the political actors in Texas government that make public policy happen. It depicts a coalition among political actors that includes interest groups, the lieutenant governor, the speaker, legislative committees, the governor, administrators, and boards and commissions.
Texas has weak legislative committees when compared with their counterparts in the U.S. Congress. This is attributable to the hands-on authority of the lieutenant governor and of the speaker of the Texas House of Representatives, who select most of the members and all of the chairs of the standing committees, conference committees, and legislative boards and com- missions. Their exercise of this power includes them as two points of the iron star coalition that formulates and implements public policy in Texas. The elected administrators, boards, and commissions are another point. The governor is also a point as a result of the line-item

veto and the power to appoint members of state policy-making boards and commissions. The virtual absence of a civil service for Texas government employees makes them more vul- nerable to influence by the appointed boards. Finally, economic interest groups make up the fifth, and arguably most important, point of the star. They provide the mortar that builds and holds together this five-pointed coalition of legislators, presiding officers, the governor, administrators, and clientele interests.
How the Coalition Functions All economic interests want favorable policies that they gain by acquiring allies in the state government. Some industries, such as insurance and oil and gas, have little need for direct appropriations and basically want only to be free of government interference. This class of interests may, however, want to use the powers of government for favorable regulations and protection from consumers and competitors. Other interests, such as the Texas State Teachers Association and the highway contractors and private prison operators, literally survive on government appropriations.
The basic goal of special interests is to accumulate "friends" among political operatives in the policy-making and regulatory areas of government. It is equally critical for political operatives to acquire friends among economically powerful individuals and special interest groups. The members of the coalition also support the friends of their friends at the other points of the iron star and thereby develop a mutual support group from which all can benefit.
Legislators, administrators, the governor, and the presiding officers rely to varying degrees on the support of their interest-group friends for campaign contributions, supplemental income, political advancement, financial advice and opportunity, and after-office employ- ment and retirement income.
As time passes and members of the coalition become more interdependent, each looks to the other for support. Legislators bargain for the interest of the coalition in the legislature. Administrators issue favorable regulations and administrative policies that support their special-interest friends. The presiding officers shepherd the proposals of their friends through the legislative process and also place the friends of economic special interests on powerful legislative committees. The governor appoints friends and friends of friends to various administrative boards and commissions that make policy affecting these same friends. Other government officials may also broker with political operatives for decisions favorable to their friends and to the friends of their friends inside the iron star coalition. Altogether, it is a system of mutual accommodation.

The Legislature, the Lieutenant Governor, and the Speaker
Bureaucratic power is increased by the support of powerful legislators because an agency is dependent on legislative allies for laws that expand its powers, increase its jurisdiction, appro- priate funds for its operation, and protect it from enemies and competitors.
Although committee chairs are important in the Texas Legislature, the short session and the power of the presiding officers limit their influence. For this reason, an agency seeks the support of the lieutenant governor and the speaker of the house, as well as members of the finance and appropriations committees, the Legislative Budget Board, and the Legislative Council.
The importance of legislative support explains the intense lobbying surrounding the choice of legislators for leadership positions and continues as legislators are appointed to powerful committees. If the interest group and its agency are unable to get allies appointed or elected to positions of influence in the legislature, they are forced to try to gain support after the legislators are chosen a more difficult endeavor.

The Control of Information
Because the bureaucracy is the branch of government that works most directly with constituent interest groups and the general public, administrative agencies gather the information used by these groups or the general public to determine what laws are needed or wanted. Information of this nature is valuable to legislators as well as to elected or appointed administrators, but may sometimes be available only at the discretion of top government administrators. In other words, these administrators may dispense or interpret information in a way that benefits their agency or constituent interests during the enactment of public policy.
Administration of the Law
Just as judges use judicial review to interpret the meaning of the law and to write case law for its implementation, bureaucrats use what might be termed "administrative review," and the rules and regulations they write to implement public policy are called administrative law. Administrative law defines the meaning of the law and determines its effect on both special interests and the public. A small number of laws undergo judicial review, whereas all laws undergo administrative review.
Although a law may remain on the books indefinitely, its effect is diminished with lax or selective enforcement. In this way, administrators establish public policies that not only affect the lives of the general public, but that also can modify the decisions of the state's elected policy makers. Although administrative decisions can be overturned by the courts and statu- tory law can be rewritten by legislatures, administrative review is the first, and often the last, determination of the meaning of a law and how rigidly it will be enforced.

Bureaucratic Accountability
LO 8.5 Evaluate strategies for holding state agencies accountable.
Throughout the history of the United States, people have tried to hold government responsible for its policies. The rise of the bureaucratic state is the most recent challenge to responsible government. The size and political power of modern bureaucracy make the problem of admin- istrative accountability ever more difficult. Various organizational arrangements and legal restrictions have been used in attempts to make the bureaucracy accountable to the citizenry, or at least to someone the citizens can hold responsible.
Accountability to the People
The simplest approach is electing executive officers to make the bureaucracy directly accountable to the people through the democratic process-the theory of elective account- ability. Texans sought to achieve accountability to the public by electing administrative officials, including the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, comptroller of public accounts, commissioner of the General Land Office, commissioner of agriculture, and members of the Railroad Commission and of the State Board of Education. Texans reasoned that the public, if given an opportunity, would keep a close watch on elected administrators and refuse to reelect those who were incompetent or dishonest. Administrators would there- fore be sensitive to the wishes of the voters and would administer the law in the interest of the general public.
Several problems have developed with the application of this idea. The most obvious is the difficulty of determining the will of the people or even determining the public interest. Texas is a mixture of many divergent groups with many, often incompatible, interests--to please one group frequently means displeasing another.

Accountability to the Legislature
Some advocates of administrative reform argue that the bureaucracy should be accountable to the legislature because many view it as the branch of government "closest" to the people. Because it is elected to protect constituent interests and because legislators establish policies, many argue that these elected representatives should determine if public policies are being administered according to legislative intent.
This principle has been implemented in Texas by establishing legislative committees and various auditing, budgeting, and oversight boards. For example, the Texas Legislature established the Sunset Advisory Commission to make recommendations as to the alteration, termination, or continuation of many of the state's boards, commissions, and agencies. These institutions and their operations are reviewed periodically and are automatically terminated unless specific legislative action is taken to renew them. Functions may also be expanded, diminished, or reassigned to other agencies. Even when agencies are renewed, the Sunset Commission continues to evaluate their compliance with legislative directives. The state audi- tor also appraises management changes recommended by the commission. It is reasoned that periodic legislative evaluation, together with agency self-evaluation, should result in better, more efficient administration.
However, the principle of accountability to the legislature is questionable. The ability of any government to separate policy formulation from its administration is difficult, and the assumption that the legislature best represents the people is arguable. Legislators' decisions can be affected by financial conflicts of interest, campaign contributions, lobbying by special interest groups, partisan considerations, primary pressures, and political ambition. Legislative accountability may serve the interests of the individual legislators and special interests, but not the general public.
Finally, because the Texas Legislature is seldom in session, permanent legislative institu- tions such as the Legislative Budget Board and the Legislative Council are given the task of overseeing the administration. These institutions lack the visibility necessary to insure effective operation in the public interest.

Accountability to the Chief Executive
Some reformers advocate a Texas administration patterned after the cabinet system of the federal government, in which the chief executive has the power to appoint and remove top administrators. This would entail a reorganization and consolidation of the executive branch into larger subject-matter departments, with the governor being given the power to appoint and remove top administrators and to control the budget. Reformers argue that a governor who had these powers would have a strong incentive to hold the appointed bureaucrats accountable for their actions as voters usually hold the governor responsible to insure mishaps in state agencies.
Theoretically, several benefits could result from accountability to the governor. The office
is visible to the general public, so the problem of who watches the watchers would be solved. There would be no question regarding final responsibility for any corruption or incompetence in the administration. Administrative control could be simplified, resulting in coordinated planning and policy implementation. Waste and duplication could be reduced. Consolidation and reorganization of the Texas administration is, without a doubt, neces- sary for an orderly, modern executive branch. If Texas reorganized public administration
along the lines of the federal model, the governor would need a similar executive office.
This executive staff, although largely out of the public eye, would nevertheless be account-
able to the governor.

This chain of accountability-administrative agency to appointed executive to staff to governor to the people would be weakened by the close ties usually found among adminis- trators, constituent interest groups, and legislators. Interest groups would continue to influ- ence administrative appointments and removals in "their agencies" just as they now influence appointments to the boards and commissions under the current system. Even under a cabinet system, the governor would have problems imposing accountability on agencies that have allies among powerful interest groups and legislators.
Bureaucratic Responsibility
To whom is the Texas administrator really accountable? The answer is to a combination of peoplethe legislature, the governor, and especially the interest groups that benefit from the programs administered by the agencies.
Open Meetings and Open Records How, then, can the Texas administration be made more accountable to the public? There is no single answer. One possibility is more transparency. A basic concept of democratic government is that policy made in the name of the public should be made in the full view of the public. Texas has made progress in this area. Open meetings laws require that meetings of government bodies at all levels be open to the general public except when personnel, land acquisition, or litigation matters are being dis- cussed. The laws further prohibit unannounced sessions and splitting up to avoid a quorum (i.e., a walking quorum), and they require that public notice be posted for both open and closed sessions. However, these laws are continuously being tested by some policy makers, who feel more comfortable operating in secret.
Openness is further encouraged by the state's open records laws, which require that records kept by the government be open to the public for only the expense involved in assem- bling and reproducing them.

Whistleblowers and Ombudsmen Another source of transparency is whistleblowers-government employees who expose bureaucratic excesses, blunders, cor- ruption, or favoritism. These employees could be commended and protected from retribu- tion, but too often they are instead exiled to the bureaucratic equivalent of Siberia or fired for their efforts. To its credit, Texas's whistleblowers law prohibits governments from acting against employees who report law violations. But enforcement is difficult and time- consuming, and whistleblowers often suffer.
An ombudsman is an independent official who takes, investigates, and mediates complaints about government bureaucrats or policy. The office originated in Sweden in the early nineteenth century and currently is present throughout the United States. As governor, Ann Richards established an ombudsman in her office in 1991. Today, the office of ombudsman exists in many state agencies to aid Texans with complaints or issues with the agency, including the Texas Health and Human Services Commission and the Texas Department of Criminal Justice.
The appointment of ombudsmen at every level of government would provide increased access to the bureaucracy regarding real or imagined administrative injustices. In this way, administrative error, injustice, or oversight could be rectified, allowing individual citizens to have a more positive attitude toward government.
Any lack of public accountability by Texas administrators cannot be wholly blamed on poor structural organization or the lack of consumer- or citizen-oriented agencies. No amount of reorganization and no number of consumer-focused actors can overcome the willingness of an apathetic or indifferent public to accept bureaucratic errors, inefficiency, excesses, favorit- ism, or corruption.

Applying What You Have Learned about the Texas Executive Branch
LO 8.6 Apply what you have learned about the Texas executive branch.
You have learned that Texas government has a plural-executive system in which the governor shares power with numerous other elected and appointed officers. Among them is the comp- troller of public accounts, whose office has been given enormous power by state law and the constitution. We asked the comptroller to give you some insight into the powers of the office and how the comptroller approaches those powers.
Glenn Hegar was first elected as the 36th Texas State Comptroller of Public Accounts in November, 2014, and was reelected for a second term in November of 2018 and reelected for a third term in November of 2022. Prior to being elected as Texas Comptroller, Hegar served in the Texas House of Representatives for two terms between 2003 and 2007 and in the Texas Senate between 2007 and 2014.

Politics in Practice
Modernizing State Financial Practices
by Glenn Hegar,
Texas State Comptroller
The Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts is rarely in the headlines, and frankly, that is a good thing. Dealing with state finances when we are doing it rightis as far from sensational as it is essential.
I serve as Texas' chief financial officer. My office collects state taxes, monitors economic trends, estimates revenue so legislators can create a state budget and acts as the treasurer for the multibillion-dollar business of Texas government. We also handle other programs, such as overseeing the first state-administered bullion depository and safeguarding unclaimed property until owners retrieve it.
In carrying out my responsibilities, I apply lessons I learned from my family, in business and in the Legislature. I am a sixth-generation Texan who grew up farming land that has been in my family since the mid-1800s. I have served in both the Texas House and Senate, so I have unique insight into the state's challenges, the ability to accomplish goals with legislators and the skills to develop common-sense solutions to problems affecting Texans.
As Comptroller, I have implemented a philosophy of customer service, transparency, communication and long-range planning. My office has executed major initiatives such as more frequent revenue estimates, government transparency, modernized agency applications, more efficient state contracting and more.
Revenue Estimating Before each regular legislative session, the Comptroller issues a Biennial Revenue Estimate (BRE). Mandated by the Texas Constitution, the BRE estimates how much revenue will be available for spending through the next two-year budget cycle, helping the Texas Legislature make decisions about funding everything state government does. After lawmakers approve a budget, I certify it to ensure that it balances. The Certification Revenue

LO 8.1 Describe the governor's office and the characteristics of the typical Texas governor. Texas governors have been Anglo, predominantly male Protestants. Modern Texas governors are conservative Republicans. Elected for four-year terms, their professional backgrounds are most commonly either business or law and they have close connections to state and national moneyed interests.
LO 8.2 Analyze both the governor's powers of persuasion and the limits on them. The governor has relatively strong legislative prerogatives, among which are the veto and the line- item veto (for the appropriations bill only). Although shared with other legislative power bases, the governors' legislative authority together with an astute use of informal powers enables them to exert influence on the direction and operation of the legislature and consequently affect public policy.
As chief executive, each year the governor makes hundreds of appointments to boards and commissions in the administration and can gain political control of these boards after serving several years in office. Although they do not have meaningful removal powers or authority to issue orders directly to most state agencies, politically savvy governors over several years in office can craft a politically formidable position by weaving their legislative, executive, and party influence into a cloth held together by their supporters and lobbyists from special interests.
LO 8.3 Analyze the structure and characteristics of the Texas bureaucracy. Texas has a plural executive system in which several state executives are elected independently of the governor. Most state agencies are actually headed by multimember boards and commissions that the governor appoints. Board members serve fixed overlapping terms, which limits the governors' powers over the agencies during their first several years in office. With a few exceptions, the board, rather than the governor, appoints the actual chief operating officer

and the governor has limited powers to issue orders to state agencies or to remove state officers. As a result, compared to other bureaucracies, the Texas bureaucracy is less centralized with no single hierarchy and no single officeholder fully in charge. Instead, the state bureaucracy is an amalgamation of hierarchies, each headed by elected or appointed officers or boards. Aside from hierarchy, the traditional model describes bureaucracies as being characterized by size, expertise, and neutrality. Reformists have pursued the goals of a public administration that is free of bias in applying the law and neutral in politics, but efforts such as the civil service reform and the creation of independent governing boards have simply substituted one kind of politics for another.
LO 8.4 Analyze the political relationships among executive agencies, the public, interest groups, and elected officials. Clientele interest groups form close alliances with state agencies that administer the government programs that benefit them. Elected officials such as the governor and legislative leaders depend on the political support and expertise provided by these groups. As a result, public policy often is made by a relatively closed network illustrated by the Iron Texas Star.
LO 8.5 Evaluate strategies for holding state agencies accountable. Attempts to hold agency officials accountable have taken several forms, including elective accountability. accountability to the legislature or chief executive, and the use of transparency to check agency abuses. Critics charge that none of these strategies has worked effectively.
LO 8.6 Apply what you have learned about the Texas executive branch. You took a glimpse inside the one of the more important elected offices in Texas's plural system. Comptroller Glenn Hegar provided his personal insight about the broad- ranging powers of his office.


















