174
Chapter 7 The Legislature
term limits Legally mandated restrictions on the number of times that a politician can be reelected to an office or the number of years that a person may hold a particular office.
The legislative branch is responsible for making law. It is through law that the state makes 1 public policy and basically determines what the state agencies will do. By passing laws, the legislature determines what is a crime, establishes the basis for a civil suit, determines what services the state will provide, and authorizes the funding to carry out the state's priorities.
In Texas, the legislature is bicameral—it consists of two houses, the thirty-one-member Texas Senate and the 150-member Texas House of Representatives. On most matters, the two houses share equal powers and both of them must agree on a proposed bill for it to become law. The Senate does have the special power to confirm or approve the governor's appointments of state officers. By establishing a bicameral legislature, the framers of the Texas Constitution followed the pattern set for the national Congress and used in every state other than Nebraska, which has a unicameral, or one-house, legislature.
The chief argument for the use of bicameral legislative bodies is that one house can serve as a check on the other so that legislation will not be passed hastily without adequate reflection, and both chambers must consider every bill before it becomes a law. Bicameralism can also slow the law-making process or can keep laws from passing through one chamber while passing in the other.
Texas has a "citizen legislature," which also is a highly centralized institution dominated by its presiding officers-the lieutenant governor in the Texas Senate and the speaker in the Texas House of Representatives-who use standing committees and a variety of other committees to control the law-making process in the state.
The Limited Legislature
LO 7.1 Describe the limits on the Texas Legislature and evaluate the concept of the "citizen legislature."
The Texas Legislature is often referred to as a "citizen legislature," whose members are commonly in session for only 140 days every other year and receive only a very modest income for the work they do. It has been said that the Texas Legislature is "full-time only part of the time." To become a full-time professional legislature would require a substantial increase in legislative salaries and much more frequent legislation sessions.
Legislative Terms and Sessions
Texas representatives are elected for two-year terms, but senators are elected for longer fouryear terms that are staggered or overlapping. That means that the entire House and half of the Senate (fifteen or sixteen senators) are elected every two years. All senators are elected in the first election following redistricting (every 10 years). At the beginning of the post-redistricting session, the senators draw lots to determine which senators will serve a two-year term. Onehalf of the senators are up for reelection again in two years, whereas the other half will not be up for reelection for four years. All senators will then serve overlapping four-year terms until the districts are again redrawn.
Texas legislators may serve as many terms as voters choose to reelect them. Unlike Texas, some states have adopted term limits, which are legal restrictions on the number of times that a politician can be reelected to a particular office or the number of years that a person may hold that office. The adoption of term limits in some states reflects an increasing frustration with government, especially the legislative branch, which seems to be more responsive to organized special interests than to the residents and businesses located within a legislator's home district.
Most supporters of term limits assume that electing new legislators could and should disrupt long-established working relationships between legislators and interest groups. Unfortunately, it is not clear whether term limits increase or reduce the influence of interest groups. Opponents of term limits argue that limiting legislators' time in office may actually be counterproductive because they result in higher turnover and the election of many inexperienced

The Limited Legislature
175
Image 7.1 When you visit the Texas Senate, you will usually see an empty chamber because the Texas Legislature has short, infrequent sessions.
* CTO What are the advantages and disadvantages of short, infrequent sessions?
lawmakers who, lacking expertise of their own, become even more dependent on lobbyists and career bureaucrats for advice, information, and expertise.

Short and infrequent sessions contribute to the "citizen" status of the legislature. The Texas Legislature begins its session on the second Tuesday in January of odd-numbered years and meets for a period of just 140 days. Forty-six states have annual legislative sessions; Texas's is the only legislature among the more populous states to meet on a biennial schedule, once every other year. The limited biennial sessions tend to work against professional and deliberative legislative practice and ultimately may work against the public interest. ${ }^1$ Texas legislators cannot possibly acquaint themselves in only 140 days with the immense volume of proposed legislation presented to them, which usually amounts to thousands of proposed bills and resolutions. Because most of the legislative work must be performed during the short regular session, time becomes critical; many pieces of legislation are never considered.

When work cannot be accomplished or a bill favored by the governor did not pass during a regular session, a 30-day special session, which can be called only by the governor, may take place after a regular session. The governor sets the agenda for the special session; only bills that fall within the topic or topics covered by that agenda may be considered during the special session. For instance, if the governor calls a special session on redistricting, only legislation related to redistricting may be approved during that special session unless the governor opens the session to additional matters. The legislature adjourns once it has voted on the items in the governor's agenda or when it reaches the 30-day limit.

178
Chapter 7 The Legislature
incumbents Currently elected officials.
descriptive representation The idea that elected bodies should accurately represent not only constituents' political views but also the ethnic and social characteristics that affect their political perspectives.
campaigns. ${ }^4$ Altogether, legislative candidates raised a total of $\$ 170$ million for their campaigns in the House and Senate races.' The amount of money needed to win an election is growing and becoming increasingly out of reach for many would-be candidates. Our Texas Insiders feature provides a concrete example of how special interests in Texas give money to power and also highlights the advantages that powerful incumbents tend to have in fundraising.
Ethnicity and Race The state of Texas has one of the most diverse populations in the United States. It is one of the few states with a majority minority population, meaning that the majority of Texans are members of an ethnic or racial minority group.
Currently, 40 percent of the Texas population is Latino, 40 percent is non-Hispanic White (Anglo), 13 percent is African American, and 6 percent is Asian American. Texas legislators are fairly diverse, but they do not fully mirror the population as would be required to achieve descriptive representation, which is the idea that elected bodies should accurately represent not only constituents' political views but also the ethnic and social characteristics that affect their political perspectives.
As Figure 7.1 indicates, a substantial majority (63 percent) of the members of the Texas Legislature are Anglo. While African Americans (10 percent of legislators) have achieved near-descriptive representational parity with the state's overall African American population (13 percent), the representation of Latinos ( 24 percent) and Asian Americans ( 3 percent) continues to lag notably behind the overall population of these two groups in Texas ( 40 percent and 6 percent, respectively).
Figure 7.1, however, masks strong partisan differences in the descriptive representation of different ethnic and racial groups in the Texas Legislature. The seventy-six Democratic legislators are much more diverse than the 105 Republican legislators. Half of the Democratic legislators ( 50 percent) are Latino, followed by 24 percent who are African American, 21 percent who are Anglo, and 5 percent who are Asian American. In sharp contrast, an overwhelming majority of Republican legislators (91 percent) are Anglo, followed by 6 percent who are Latino, 2 percent who are Asian American, and 1 percent who are African American.
Gender The 2023 Texas Legislature now has the highest proportion of women members ever in its history. However, this record of 30 percent still means that women are dramatically underrepresented in the Texas Legislature compared to their share of the state's population (50 percent). In 2023, women held eight of the thirty-one seats in the Texas Senate ( 28 percent) and forty-six of the 150 seats in the Texas House ( 31 percent).
Once again, Figure 7.1 masks strong partisan differences in the descriptive representation of women and men, with the Democratic legislators coming much closer to mirroring the state's population. Among the 76 Democratic legislators, 47 percent are women, more than twice the proportion of the 105 Republican legislators who are women (17 percent).
LGBTQ In 1991, Democrat Glen Maxey of Austin became the first openly LGBTQ person to be elected to the Texas Legislature, serving in the Texas House of Representatives for a dozen years representing Austin. In 2023, there were eight openly LGBTQ members in the Texas House, five of whom in 2019 established the Texas Legislature's first LGBTQ Caucus. All eight are Democrats, six of whom are women and two of whom are men; and three of whom are Anglos, three of whom are African Americans and two of whom are Latinos.


180
Chapter 7 The Legislature
single-member district A district that elects one senator or one representative; districts should be equal in population.
ex officio
Holding a position automatically because one also holds some other office.
malapportionment The drawing of district lines so that one district's population is substantially larger or smaller than another's.
reapportionment The redistricting, or redrawing of district lines, after every census to reflect the population changes over the previous decade.
gerrymandering The practice of drawing district lines in such a way as to give an advantage to candidates from a certain party, faction, ethnic or racial group.
Legislatures, about three-fourths of lawmakers in the nation hold college degrees; 88 percent of Texas lawmakers hold at least a bachelor's degree and 57 percent have earned higher degrees. Only 2 percent of Texas lawmakers have not attended college.
One-third of Texas legislators hold law degrees. As an informal qualification to become a legislator in the state, educational attainment seems to resonate with voters as being a very important aspect of being electable.
Geographic Districting
Each legislator is elected from a single-member district, with the state representative districts being quite a bit smaller than the senate districts. The 150 House districts should be equal in population, as should the thirty-one Senate districts. After the decennial census has been completed, districts must be redrawn to reflect population changes in the state and to equalize the population in each district.
After the 2020 elections and 2020 decennial U.S. census, Republicans controlled both the House and Senate with large majorities and were easily able to agree on district maps that were favorable to the Republican Party, as reflected in Figures 7.2 and 7.3.
The state legislature is responsible for drawing the districts from which they, themselves, will be elected. Legislators, therefore, have a considerable personal political stake in the districting process, and it is not surprising that they have sometimes found it impossible to agree on where district lines should be drawn.
If the legislature fails to redistrict, the state constitution requires the Legislative Redistricting Board to redraw the lines for the Texas House and Senate. This board is ex officio, which means that its members hold offices or positions automatically because they also hold some other office. It is made up of the lieutenant governor, the speaker of the house, the attorney general, the comptroller, and the commissioner of the General Land Office.
Malapportionment Geographic districting uses census data to divide the population into approximately equal districts for every elected position, but this has not always been the case. Historically, as state populations began to shift from rural areas to the cities in the early twentieth century, rurally dominated legislatures simply ignored urban growth as they drew new district lines. The result was sparsely populated rural districts and densely populated urban districts, which maintained rural control over newly urban states like Texas.
However, in the 1960s, U.S. Supreme Court decisions in several cases, including Reynolds v. Sims, outlawed malapportionment, the drawing of district lines so that one district's population is substantially larger or smaller than another's. The Supreme Court ruled, "Simply stated, an individual's right to vote for state legislators is unconstitutionally impaired when its weight is in a substantial fashion diluted when compared with votes of citizens living in other parts of the State. ${ }^{n 6}$
Based on the principle of "one person, one vote," this decision mandated reapportionment - a redistricting, or redrawing of district lines, after every census to reflect the actual population changes over the previous decade; it required that district lines be drawn so that the population of all districts is approximately equal. In practice, the population of state legislative districts can deviate plus or minus 5 percent from the average, but not more.
After the 2020 census, the average population of an electoral district for the Texas House of Representatives was 194,555; House members represented 56,000 more people than they did just two decades earlier. Texas senators represented an average of 941,397 residents, 268,000 more people than they did after the 2000 census.
Gerrymandering Gerrymandering is the practice of drawing district lines in such a way as to give an advantage to candidates from a certain party, faction, and ethnic or racial group at the expense of other groups. It should not be confused with malapportionment

Electing Legislators
183
because gerrymandering is possible even when the population of every district is equal; it is more a matter of which people are drawn into each district rather than how many.

Where district lines are drawn has an enormous impact on the political, ideological, racial, and ethnic makeup of a legislative body and the policies that it produces. During the redistricting process, political careers may be made or broken, public policy can be determined for at least a decade, and the power of ethnic, racial, or political minorities can be neutralized.

Partisan gerrymandering is the drawing of district lines to maximize the majority party's representation. District lines are drawn so that the majority party's voters are able to elect as many legislators as possible. The U.S. Supreme Court has reviewed several cases of partisan gerrymandering, but has not yet found a constitutional standard that would restrict it.? Another look at Figures 7.2 and 7.3 shows that the current redistricting plans relied heavily on partisan gerrymandering, which in part allowed the Republican Party to maintain majorities in both houses of the Texas Legislature.

Gerrymandering Techniques Two basic gerrymander techniques are generally used to draw district lines to benefit the majority party. Cracking is the technique of dividing up a minority party's voters into so many geographical districts that their voting power in any one district is negligible; areas that would otherwise support the minority party are split into several districts that the majority party controls. To get a better idea of how cracking a population works, look at Figure 7.4.
cracking
A gerrymandering technique of dividing up a minority party's voters into so many geographical districts that their voting power in any one district is negligible.

Figure 1.4 A Schematic to Illustrate the Process of Gerrymandering
In the schematic on the left, the blue dots represent eight Democrats and the red dots represent the same number of Republicans in four equally competitive districts, each electing one legislator. The figure on the right shows how the same population can be gerrymandered to guarantee a three-to-one advantage for Democrats. Try your hand at drawing districts with a three-to-one advantage for the Republicans.

Cengage Learning.

184
Chapter 7 The Legislature
packing Gerrymandering technique in which members of a party are concentrated into one district, thereby ensuring that the group will influence only one district's election rather than several.
Another technique of gerrymandering involves concentrating, or packing, the minority party into as few districts as possible to minimize the number of legislators it can elect. The majority party uses this technique when there may be so many votes for the minority party candidate that, if left in nongerrymandered districts, they could affect the outcome of elections in many districts. Figure 7.4 shows how the packing technique might benefit the majority party.
Alternatives to Gerrymandering Several states have recognized the conflict of interest inherent in allowing legislators to draw their own election districts. More than a dozen of them have reduced the role of the legislature in redistricting and have instead turned much of the process over to an independent bipartisan or nonpartisan commission, as shown in our How Does Texas Compare? feature. According to a 2021 University of Houston Hobby School survey, more than two out of every three Texans would like to see their state follow this lead.
Democrats and members of minority groups may support creating a redistricting commission in Texas because they believe gerrymandering unfairly costs them political representation as Republican legislators have drawn districts to their party's advantage. Other people may support an independent redistricting commission because they believe it is a conflict of interest for legislators themselves to draw the lines from which they are elected. Furthermore, gerrymandering reduces party competition in elections as legislators draw district lines to make sure a member from one party is elected over the other.
Did You Know? Drawing district lines for partisan political advantage got the name gerrymandering in 1812, when the Massachusetts Legislature and Governor Elbridge Gerry, wishing to preserve a Federalist majority, redrew a district in such a convoluted shape that a political cartoonist portrayed it as a salamander and dubbed it the "Gerrymander." The shapes of several current Texas congressional districts exceed the oddity of those originally gerrymandered districts in Massachusetts.
Racial Gerrymandering Unlike partisan gerrymandering, which the Supreme Court considers a political matter, racial or ethnic gerrymandering is a special legal issue because the U.S. Constitution forbids government discrimination based on race. In two cases, ${ }^8$ the Court ruled that drawing district lines to limit racial minority influence violates the Fourteenth Amendment. Not only did the Court rule in both of these cases that racial gerrymandering is unconstitutional, but in one districting case, the Court went so far as to say that the racial intent was obvious because district lines were so "irregular and bizarre in shape that they could not be understood to be anything other than to segregate voters."
The federal Voting Rights Act of 1965 also prohibits policies intended to dilute minority voting strength, which presented a special problem for Texas legislative districting after the 2010 census. $^{10}$ Several groups sued the state before the newly drawn maps could be put in place. Because of the Voting Rights Act, Texas and eight other states with histories of racial discrimination were required to submit their district maps to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) or to the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia for review (preclearance). In 2013, however, the U.S. Supreme Court (in Shelby v. Holder) concluded that the formula used to determine which states were required to seek preclearance was unconstitutional (see Chapter 2). This decision resulted in Texas and the eight other states no longer having to obtain preclearance, and some have argued that the result has been that voting rights laws have been undermined.

Electing Legislators
185
How Does Texas Compare?
Alternatives to Legislative Gerrymandering Although the U.S. Supreme Court has refused to outlaw political gerrymandering, state courts in several states such as New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland have found that it violates state constitutional guarantees of free and equal elections. Most states have similar constitutional provisions ${ }^{11}$ that might allow courts in other states to invalidate districting maps that are so politically manipulated as to unconstitutionally discriminate against voters based on their party identification or political views.

Figure 7.5 shows that, unlike Texas, 15 states have attempted to remove the appearance of conflict of interest in the districting process by removing legislators from the process and transferring it to an independent bipartisan or nonpartisan commission. In some cases, these commissions
have been highly independent, and when they include a significant number of members who are not beholden to one of the two major parties, they have produced districts that are compact, contiguous, and representative of the states' population. ${ }^{12}$ In other states, the commissions have been independent in name only and simply reflect the political priorities of those who have appointed them.
Some states have reformed their redistricting process in other ways. For example, in Missouri, the state demographer initially draws legislative districts to be presented to the commission, while Iowa has placed the responsibility of initially drawing maps in the hands of a nonpartisan legislative staff that is forbidden from using political or election data or even the addresses of incumbents to propose districting maps for consideration by the legislature.
Figure 1.5 States Using Independent Districting Commissions
Source: National Conference of State Legislatures.

For Debate
$\star$ CTO Is it possible for human beings to set aside their political biases as they draw district lines? What would be the characteristics of fair legislative districts?
* SRQ Should Texas transfer the process of legislative districting to a nonpartisan,
independent commission, or is it best left in the hands of our elected representatives? What incentives would cause partisan legislators to cede their redistricting power to a truly independent body?

186
Chapter 7 The Legislature
The Texas Legislature continues to be dominated by Republicans at the expense of Democrats and the large portion of ethnic and racial minorities who identify with them. Gerrymandering partially explains why the legislature does not fully reflect the political and demographic makeup of the state's thirty million residents.

Powers of the Legislature and Its Leaders
LO 7.3 Analyze the powers of the legislature and its presiding officers.
The presiding officer of the Texas House of Representatives is the speaker of the house, and the lieutenant governor acts as president of the Texas Senate. The presiding officers have extensive appointment power over boards, commissions, and legislative committees.

Both legislative chambers have broad powers that allow them to pass laws making public policy and to monitor state agencies, control the budgeting process, and engage in self-policing. As it exercises these powers, the legislature has the assistance of several boards, councils, and commissions that provide leadership and advice to both the House and the Senate.

Powers of the Presiding Officers
The two most powerful individuals in the Texas Legislature are the lieutenant governor and the speaker of the house. The rules of each legislative chamber, formal and informal, give the presiding officers the procedural power to appoint most committee members and committee chairpersons, assign bills to committees, schedule legislation for floor action, recognize members on the floor for amendments and points of order, interpret the procedural rules when conflict arises, and appoint the chairpersons and members of joint and
Image 1.2 As the presiding officer of the Texas Senate, Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick holds an office with power that sometimes rivals that of the governor.
$\star$ CSQ Write an essay that explains both the lieutenant governor's executive and legislative powers. Specifically, describe how the lieutenant governor is able to control the Texas Senate. Why do you suppose the Senate has written rules that give so much power to its presiding officer when most other states make their lieutenant governor a mere figurehead, like the vice president in the U.S. Senate?

Powers of the Legislature and Its Leaders
187
conference committees. Furthermore, statutes grant the presiding officers institutional powers to appoint the members and serve as joint chairs of the Legislative Budget Board and Legislative Council and determine the members of the Legislative Audit Committee and the Sunset Advisory Commission.

Lieutenant Governor The presiding officer in the Texas Senate is the lieutenant governor, who serves as the president of the senate. The lieutenant governor is elected independently from the governor for a four-year term in a statewide, partisan election and is paid a $\$ 7,200$ annual salary.

The lieutenant governor is in the unique position of having important roles in both the legislative and executive branches. As part of the executive branch, the lieutenant governor becomes governor if that office becomes vacant through death, disability, or resignation. In that event, the Senate elects one of its members to serve as lieutenant governor until the next regular election.

As part of the legislative branch, the lieutenant governor also serves as the presiding officer over the state Senate and has a great deal of power as a result (see Figure 7.6).

The Texas Constitution allows for the Senate to write its own rules at the beginning of each 140-day legislative session, and these rules give the lieutenant governor extensive legislative powers as well as organizational, procedural, administrative, and planning authority.

Although not actually a senator, the lieutenant governor can break tie votes on bills, and the Senate rules allow for the entire Senate to convene as a committee of the whole, which allows the lieutenant governor to debate and vote on any bill as long as the Senate is designated as a committee.
Figure 7.6 Powers of the Presiding Officers
The lieutenant governor and speaker have powerful tools to control the legislative process.
Refer bills to committee
Appoint most committees
Appoint committee chairs
Preside over floor action
Appoint conference committees
Image 1.3 Speaker Dade Phelan served his first time as Speaker in 2021 and was reelected by his colleagues for a second term in 2023. He is the fourth Republican Speaker in the Post-Reconstruction era.
$\star$ CTO Analyze the powers of the speaker in the Texas House. Why is this office considered the third most powerful in Texas government?
$\star$ ст0 How is the speaker elected?


Powers of the Legislature and Its Leaders
189
Speaker of the House The presiding officer of the 150-member House of Representatives is the speaker of the house. Unlike the senate, the entire House elects one of its own members to serve as the presiding officer for a two-year term.

During the session, the speaker maintains order during floor debate, recognizes legislators who wish to speak on the House floor, and decides on procedural matters as the need arises. Unlike the lieutenant governor, as a member of the House of Representatives, the speaker may debate bills and is allowed to vote on all bills and resolutions that pass through the House, although the speaker rarely casts a roll call vote.

Some of the speaker's most important duties and responsibilities are determined by the House Rules of Procedure, which are adopted by a majority vote of the members at the beginning of each regular session of the legislature. The rules give the speaker the authority to appoint members of each standing committee, to designate the chair and vice chair for each committee, and to refer all proposed legislation to the appropriate committee. The speaker also appoints members to conference and joint committees, creates select committees, and authorizes committees to conduct business during the interim when the legislature is not in session.

Powers of the Legislature
Both houses of the legislature have powers that include passing bills and resolutions, representing constituencies, and conducting bureaucratic oversight and investigations. Other powers are given to one legislative chamber, but not the other. For example, the Texas Senate has the power to approve or disapprove gubernatorial appointments. The House has the sole power to initiate impeachment, and the Senate the sole power to convict on impeachment charges.

Passing Bills The primary responsibility of the legislature is to pass bills, which are proposals to pass new laws, change existing ones, or adopt the state budget. A bill may be introduced in either chamber of the legislature; it is designated by the abbreviations HB (House Bill) or SB (Senate Bill) according to where it was first introduced and carries the same designation throughout the legislative process. A bill must be passed by both houses by a majority vote and be presented to the governor to be signed into law. We explore the major steps in the legislative process later in the chapter.

Bills fall into three categories: special, general, and local. Special bills create exceptions to laws already enacted; general bills apply to everyone in the state; local bills usually apply to a single unit of local government and usually pass at the request of legislators representing the area. Bills normally take effect 90 days after they pass unless a two-thirds majority of each house votes to have the bill take effect as soon as the governor signs it.

Because the legislature is required to read and decide upon hundreds of bills during a legislative session, they have several legislative organizations that help with the process, including the Legislative Council and the Legislative Budget Board.

The Legislative Council The fourteen-member Legislative Council is a joint legislative committee that supervises a staff that provides research support, information, and bill-drafting assistance to legislators. It is dominated by the speaker and lieutenant governor and includes six members from each chamber appointed by the presiding officers. The Legislative Council staff is specialized in document production, information systems, legal services, and research; it also plays a key role in the redistricting process.

The Legislative Budget Board The most important of the bills to pass through the legislature is the state's budget, or appropriations bill. The state's budget must be approved for a full two-year cycle and includes items such as transportation, education, health benefits,

Powers of the Legislature and Its Leaders
191
intended-a process known as bureaucratic oversight. The legislature requires agencies to submit periodic reports to the legislature concerning how they spend their money and conduct their operations. The legislature has investigative power and has given committees the power to require individuals to testify under oath and to require agencies being investigated to provide documents and records of their operations. Legislative committees commonly use these powers to look into problems in the bureaucracy in order to determine if new or modified legislation is required. Two legislative organizations assist in the oversight and evaluation of state agencies-the Legislative Audit Committee and the Sunset Advisory Commission.

The Legislative Audit Committee The Legislative Audit Committee appoints and supervises the state auditor who, with the consent of the Senate, heads the State Auditor's Office. The six-member Legislative Audit Committee is composed of the lieutenant governor, the chair of the Senate Finance Committee, one senator chosen by the lieutenant governor, the house speaker, and the chairs of the House Appropriations Committee and Ways and Means Committee.

The authority of the State Auditor's Office is both broad and deep. Under the direction of the committee, state agencies and departments, including colleges and universities, as well as any entity receiving funds from the state, can be audited. The auditor's office may conduct financial, compliance, efficiency, effectiveness, and special audits as well.

The Sunset Advisory Commission The Texas Sunset Act was enacted in response to the perception by the public that federal and state government spending was escalating beyond control. To enforce the Act, Texas created the twelve-member Sunset Advisory Commission, which recommends keeping, abolishing, reorganizing, or giving new scope and authority to state agencies.

The lieutenant governor appoints five senators and one public member, and the speaker appoints five representatives and one public member to the commission. Public members are appointed for two-year terms and legislators for four-year staggered terms. The presiding officers appoint the commission chair. The chair position alternates between Senate and House members. The commission employs a director and a staff that conduct the reviews and present their findings to the commission.

The commission reevaluates the need for more than 130 statutory state agencies on a 12 -year cycle to determine the need for their continuance. When an agency is created, its particular "sunset" date is included in its charter. About twenty to thirty agencies undergo the sunset review process every biennium.

In the Sunset Advisory Commission's more than 40-year history, the commission has abolished or restructured more than ninety state agencies, including forty-one that were completely abolished. The Sunset Advisory Commission estimates that it has saved the state of Texas more than $\$ 1$ billion during its existence. ${ }^{13}$

Impeachment and Removal from Power The Texas Legislature can call an impeachment session in which the House of Representatives may charge an official with wrongdoing. Executive officers of the state, including the governor, lieutenant governor, the attorney general, the commissioner of the Land Office, and the comptroller of public accounts, may all be impeached by the House. Elected district judges, appellate judges, and the judges of the Supreme Court of Texas and the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals may also be impeached by the House.

Once the House votes to impeach an official, the senate holds a court-like hearing and may, by a two-thirds vote, remove the official from an elected position. The legislature cannot take any other action except for bringing the charges of impeachment and removing the person from office. If impeached officials have committed illegal acts, they may later be prosecuted in regular criminal proceedings. An impeachment session may be called by the legislature without the governor's approval.
bureaucratic oversight The legislature monitoring state agencies to see that these agencies are carrying out public policies as intended.


192
Chapter 7 The Legislature
Did You Know? On May 27, 2023 the Texas House approved HR 2377, which contained 20 articles of impeachment against Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, by a 121 to 23 vote. Paxton's impeachment trial in the Texas Senate was scheduled for September 5th, 2023.
legislative redress The power of the legislature to monitor and police itself.
Image 7.4 Standing committees do much of the legislative work that involves gathering information in public hearings and managing the markup process of debating, making essential compromises, amending, and rewriting a bill so that it can be passed into law.
*CTQ Explain how the presiding officers influence the work of standing committees.
Legislative Redress The legislature has the power to monitor and police itself. This power is called legislative redress. When wrongdoing by a member of the House or Senate is reported to the leadership, the chamber may create a committee to investigate and determine the fate of the individual who has committed the offense. In May of 2023, the Texas House expelled Representative Bryan Slaton by a 147 to 0 vote (HR 1542) for having an inappropriate relationship with one of his interns.
Senate Confirmation Power The Texas Senate must approve of all appointments made by the governor with a two-thirds vote of the senators present. Senatorial courtesy is an unofficial means by which a senator from the home district of an appointee has the right to agree or disagree with an appointment. If the senator objects to a prospective appointee, then the entire Senate will not approve the appointment. It is thus in the governor's best interest to consult with the Senate during the nomination process; knowing in advance that the local senator agrees with the nominee makes confirmation more likely.
The Legislative Process
LO 7.4 Analyze legislative processes, the committee structure, and how a bill becomes a law.
Although many of these functions are important, the major function of a legislative institution is to pass laws. Although the House and Senate use slightly different procedures, the power of the presiding officers is apparent at each step and directly affects whether or not a bill becomes law.
To understand how a bill becomes a law, you must understand the legislative processes that begin with the introduction of the bill into the House or Senate. Although only members of the legislature may introduce a bill or propose a law, many bills originate outside the legislature as ideas of interest groups or the executive branch. Once a bill is introduced, the next steps include referral to committee, committee action, scheduling, floor action, conference committee action, and final passage.
The Legislative Committees
Because of the volume of legislative proposals offered each session, legislators cannot possibly become familiar with all the bills and resolutions-not even all the major ones. As a result, the legislature is organized into committees for the division of labor necessary to ensure that every member participates in the debate and discussion on proposed legislation. Committees are often referred to as "little legislatures" because of the amount of work they do and the power they wield over the law-making process. Once committees make a decision on proposed legislation, it is highly likely that the House or Senate will follow its committees' recommendations.
Legislative committees are organized by subject matter and function. The various types of committees include standing committees, subcommittees, joint committees, ad hoc committees, select committees, conference committees, and interim committees.

The Legislative Process
193
Standing Committees The most common committees are standing committees, which are permanent committees that function throughout the legislative session. There are two types, substantive and procedural, which do much of the legislative work in both chambers of the Texas Legislature and are part of the permanent structure of the legislature. Some of the more important substantive standing committees in the Senate include the State Affairs Committee, the Finance Committee, and committees on education, transportation, and criminal justice. Important examples in the house are the State Affairs Committee, the Ways and Means Committee, the committees on higher education, criminal jurisprudence, and of course, the Appropriations Committee, which operates with several subcommittees.

Substantive committees consider the content of bills that have been introduced; they specialize in various types of public policy, such as taxation, education, or agriculture. They hold hearings and debates; they can mark up bills, rewriting or changing them by adding or deleting provisions before reporting them out for consideration by the whole House or Senate. They may also allow bills to be pigeonholed, meaning they are set aside and no action is taken on them for the entire legislative session. Many bills are pigeonholed for lack of political support or for lack of time during the short sessions.

Procedural committees deal with the legislative process. For example, the House Rules and Resolutions Committee proposes the rules adopted at the beginning of each regular session to govern legislative procedure throughout the session. The house calendars committees regulate the flow of legislation, determining when a bill will be taken up for consideration. Other procedural committees deal with rules and ethics, administration, and investigations.

Standing committees are made up of a chairperson, a vice chair, and members selected by the presiding officers, who must give some preference to the most senior legislators. Most senators and representatives serve on several committees, and attending committee meetings takes up much of the legislator's time during the one 140-day regular session.

Because several thousand bills are introduced during each legislative session, a division of labor is needed. Every bill is referred to a standing committee, which conducts public hearings in which witnesses - both for and against — may be heard, debates held, and bills marked up. Because standing committees do the basic legislative work, most legislators rely heavily on them for guidance in deciding how to vote on a bill once it reaches the floor.

Subcommittees Some of the standing committees have been further divided into subcommittees, which specialize in particular categories of legislation. The subcommittees are usually the first to become familiar with a bill. Made up of a smaller number of standing committee members, subcommittees hold initial hearings, mark up legislation, and then report their work to the full standing committee.

Joint Committees The membership of any joint committee is made up of both senators and representatives. Sometimes referred to as boards, these committees can be either temporary or permanent and usually serve a specific function, like the Legislative Budget Board (LBB) or the Legislative Education Board (LEB). The presiding officers appoint the members of these committees, and they either serve as the chair and vice chair or appoint those who do. The purpose of a joint committee is to evaluate state policy proposals that may be considered by both chambers, making the passage of the bill easier and faster in the short session.

Ad Hoc and Select Committees Ad hoc and select committees are temporary committees as opposed to permanent committees. Ad hoc committees are designed to address one specific issue in the legislative process, such as conference committees that have the task of ironing out differences between the House and Senate versions of a bill; they are temporary and are disbanded once they have completed their assignment. As with other committees, they are made up of legislators appointed by the presiding officers.

Select committees are also temporary committees, usually created to study a particular issue or problem and give advice to the legislature. For example, in February of 2023, Speaker
standing committees Permanent committees that function throughout the legislative session. There are two types: substantive and procedural.
mark up To rewrite or change a bill by adding or deleting provisions before it is considered for passage.
pigeonholed A bill having been set aside and no action taken on it throughout the entire legislative session; many bills are pigeonholed.
subcommittees
Subdivisions of standing committees that consider specialized areas and categories of proposed legislation.
joint committee
A committee that includes both senators and representatives.
ad hoc committee
A committee designed to address one specific issue in the legislative process. Its function is temporary, and the committee is disbanded when the function is complete.
select committee
A temporary committee that is created for one specific purpose and usually serves in an advisory capacity.

194
Chapter 7 The Legislature
interim committee Committees that meet between legislative sessions.
suspension of the rule Setting aside the rule that puts bills in chronological order so that other bills can be considered.
Dade Phelan appointed a House select committee on youth health and safety to provide a cross-jurisdictional forum for the consideration of a wide range of issues that affect the health, safety, and rights of Texas youth. A select committee may include members from one or both chambers, and sometimes non-legislators with special knowledge about the issue.
Interim Committees Committees that meet between legislative sessions are called interim committees; they play a crucial role in the Texas Legislature and help to sustain the biennial legislative cycle. During the 17 to 19 months that the legislature is not in regular or special session, the state is faced with new challenges and needs, so members who are assigned to these committees are directed to consider proposed legislation for the next session or to address new issues that may be facing the state.
Most of the preliminary work on larger, sometimes controversial, bills is done in the interim, which allows the membership to spend less time on those bills during the legislative session. Interim committee recommendations on major issues are often critical when the bills they considered later get to the floor during the regular session.
The committee structure of the legislature is integral to the consideration of legislation. The presiding officers select committee members and also decide which committee will be assigned a particular bill.
Scheduling
Once it gets out of committee, a bill must be placed on a calendar so that it can be debated, amended, and voted on by each house.
House Calendars Committees The House of Representatives has two calendars committees that handle the schedules of all bills that come out of their standing committees: the House Calendars Committee and the House Local \& Consent Calendars Committee. These two committees place a bill on any one of the house calendars:
- Emergency Calendar
- Major State Calendar
- Constitutional Amendments Calendar
- General State Calendar
- Local and Consent Calendar
- Resolutions Calendar
- Congratulatory and Memorial Resolutions Calendar
The calendar schedule includes the time for floor debate and for when the vote on the bill will occur. Members of the House must cast their vote for a bill during the time allotted for the vote, so they must pay special attention to the calendars. Resolutions and bills that pertain to local or noncontroversial matters are placed on the resolutions or local and consent calendars and are usually adopted unanimously as a group without debate for each individual item. The process is not so automatic for major or controversial legislation; when or whether the legislation will be scheduled on a calendar is a decision largely determined by the speaker and the House Calendars Committee chair. If the bill is important or urgent, it may be scheduled on the Emergency Calendar or Major State Calendar, with debate and a preliminary vote scheduled early in the session.
Senate Calendar Officially the senate has a calendar system that advances bills systematically. A senate rule requires that bills be placed on the calendar and then considered on the senate floor in the same chronological order in which they were reported from the committees. In practice, bills are taken off the calendar for senate floor consideration by a suspension of the rule, setting aside the rule that puts bills in chronological order so that other bills can be

The Legislative Process
195
considered. This requires a five-ninths majority vote of the senate. The process goes something like this: The first bill placed on the senate calendar each session is called a blocking bill; it is usually a bill that will never be considered by the full senate. The blocking bill is never taken up on the senate floor; its only purpose is to stop floor consideration of any other bills unless five-ninths of the senators vote to suspend the rule requiring chronological consideration of bills.

Five-Ninths Rule This practice affects the senate's entire legislative process because it allows fourteen senators to block a bill. The irony is that although only a simple majority is necessary for final passage of a bill in the senate, a five-ninths majority is needed to get the bill to the floor for consideration. The senate can let a bill die without ever having a floor vote一it just fails to reach the floor because it is never taken up for consideration.

For more than 50 years, the senate required a two-thirds vote (twenty-one senators if all thirty-one were present) to take up a bill for consideration. But in 2011, realizing that enough Democrats opposed the proposed voter identification bill to ensure its defeat, the Republican majority adopted a rule specifically to waive the two-thirds requirement for a bill to require citizens to show state-issued picture identification in order to vote.

Then, during the 2015 session, the Republican majority reduced from two-thirds to threefifths (nineteen senators) the requirement to take up all bills. Most recently, after the Republican Senate majority fell from nineteen to eighteen after the 2020 election, the Texas GOP once again reduced the requirement (this time to 18 , or five-ninths) so that Democrats could not block Republican-sponsored legislation. Following the 2022 election, the Republican Senate majority returned to nineteen, but the Senate retained the five-ninths rule, meaning that the support of eighteen senators is required for any bill to reach the floor for a vote, or, conversely, that fourteen senators can together prevent any bill from reaching the floor.

Floor Action
Floor action refers to action by the entire House or the entire Senate to debate, amend, and vote on legislation. To take official action, each house requires a quorum of two-thirds of its membership to be present. On several occasions, a determined minority opposed to a scheduled action has used quorum-busting tactics by deliberately absenting themselves to deny their chamber the quorum necessary to proceed on any legislation.

During floor action, the Texas Constitution requires that bills must be "read on three consecutive days in each house." The purpose of the requirement was to ensure that laws would not be passed without adequate opportunity for debate and understanding. Bills are read once upon being introduced and prior to being assigned to a committee by the presiding officer. In practice, though, the entire bill is seldom read at this time. Instead, a caption or a brief summary is read to acquaint legislators with the subject of the bill.

The bill is read the second time in each house; if an entire bill is to be read, it is usually on this second reading. At this stage, the bill is debated and amendments may be added by a simple majority. On the third reading, at least one day after approval on the second reading, a two-thirds majority is required to add further amendments, but only a simple majority is required for final passage of the completed bill.

The constitution allows bills that are "cases of imperative public necessity," as so stated in the bill, to be read for the third time on the same day as floor passage, as long as four-fifths of the membership agrees.
blocking bill
The first bill placed on the senate calendar in each session, which is usually a bill that will never be considered by the full senate.
Floor action
Action by the entire House or the entire Senate to debate, amend, and vote on legislation.
quorum
To take official action, both houses require two-thirds of the total membership to be present.

196
Chapter 7 The Legislature
floor leaders The legislators who are responsible for getting legislation passed or defeated.
point of order A formal objection that rules of procedure are not being followed on the house floor.
chubbing
Slowing the legislative process by debating earlier bills for the maximum allotted time, asking the bill's sponsor trivial questions, and proposing so many amendments and raising so many points of order that the house does not get around to the bill to which they ultimately object.
House Floor Action The speaker of the house presides over all floor action. The floor leaders are the legislators who are responsible for getting legislation passed or defeated. They stand at the microphone podium at the front of the chamber, answer questions, and lead debate on the bill; their job is to negotiate, bargain, and compromise to either pass or defeat a bill. Another microphone podium located at the back of the chamber (referred to as the Back Mic) is available for other lawmakers who wish to speak or ask questions. Each representative is allotted 10 minutes to speak; few of them utilize this limited privilege because most representatives have decided how they are going to vote on bills before they reach the floor.
Floor action usually follows a routine, but it can become quite dramatic and debate can become intense when major legislation is brought up for a vote. Representatives opposing legislation may bring up points of order requiring rulings by the speaker. A point of order is a representative's formal objection that the rules of procedure are not being followed on the house floor. If the speaker sustains the point of order late in the session, there may not be time to correct the error, and the bill dies.
Late in the session, opponents may attempt to delay action on a bill in an effort to run out the clock on the session. Unlike state senators, representatives do not have the privilege of unlimited debate, but they have developed other strategies to stop legislative action on a bill that they do not want to come up for a vote. For example, knowing that a bill they oppose is scheduled to come up for debate, opponents may engage in chubbing, which slows down the whole legislative process (see Image 7.5). Chubbing includes debating earlier bills for the maximum allotted time, asking the bill's sponsor trivial questions, and proposing so many
Image 7.5 Representative Terry Canales ( $D$-Edinburg) tweets from the House floor in the midst of chubbing during the penultimate day of the 2015 session for the second reading of a bill to take place. Democrats had been chubbing on bills like HB 1798 in order to kill a bill that was further down the calendar (HB 4105) that would have forbidden the state government or local governments from using public funds to issue same-sex marriage licenses. Opponents of HB 4105 were successful as the clock struck midnight on May 14 before it could be voted upon, but their chubbing resulted in dozens of other bills that were a high priority for many legislators also dying along with it, hence the smell of dead bills and desperation among legislators to which Canales refers.
Follow
As HB1798 proceeds, the smell of dead bills and legislative desperation fills the chamber. \#chub \#txlege
톨
How does the short legislative session empower legislators willing to employ delaying tactics such as chubbing?

The Legislative Process
197
amendments and raising so many points of order that the house does not get around to the bill to which they object-the ultimate goal being that the deadlines pass or the session ends before the bill can reach the floor for a vote.

To vote, house members insert ID cards that allow them to push buttons to record a "yea," "nay," or "present" vote on a large electronic scoreboard. The vote each representative makes is visible as a green, red, or white light next to each legislator's name. In the past, lawmakers decided many bills by voice vote only, casting an oral vote that was not recorded in the official record. Casting oral votes did not provide constituents a way of knowing how lawmakers voted on the bills because their votes were not recorded. A state constitutional amendment finally ended this practice by requiring recorded votes (often referred to as roll-call votes) at least on a bill's final passage; members' votes must now be entered into the official record of each house.
voice vote
An oral vote that is not put in the official record.
recorded votes
On final bill passage, votes and the names of those casting them are recorded in each house's journal.
filibuster
A prolonged debate by a senator to delay passage of a bill.

Senate Floor Action In the Texas Senate, all floor action is presided over by the lieutenant governor. Because most bills that come up for a vote in the senate are voted off of the calendar by a five-ninths vote, it usually means that the bill has already been considered and very little debate is needed. Only rarely does a senator opposing a bill resort to a filibuster - a prolonged debate to delay passage of a billon the senate floor. Senators may use a filibuster either to attract public attention to a bill that is sure to pass without the filibuster or to delay legislation in the closing days of the session. In fact, just the threat of a filibuster late in the session may be enough to force a bill's supporters to change the content of the bill to reach a compromise with the dissatisfied senator.

If a filibuster does occur, it means it was impossible to reach a compromise or that the bill's supporters refused to be intimidated by the threat of a filibuster. Wendy Davis, at the time a Democratic senator from Fort Worth, used the filibuster to protest the billions of dollars in spending cuts to public education that resulted from the 82nd Legislative Session. The filibuster forced then-Governor Rick Perry to call a special session to address education spending. Senator Davis later conducted a filibuster of legislation to restrict abortions that gained nationwide attention.

The entire thirty-one-member senate declare itself a committee called a committee of the whole, which helps to speed up the process for bills to be considered or voted on. The lieutenant governor appoints a senator to preside over the thirty-one-member committee which allows the lieutenant governor to debate and vote on all questions, but otherwise the senate rules are observed. No journal is kept of the proceedings.

Usually after a modest amount of debate, the Texas Senate takes a vote without the benefit of an electronic scoreboard. Senators hold up a single finger to vote "yea" and two fingers to vote "nay." A clerk records the vote, and only a simple majority is necessary for passage.

Conference Committees
Often the House and Senate pass differing versions of the same bill and a temporary conference committee must be appointed to resolve differences between the two versions. Conference committees are made up of five senators and five representatives, and a separate conference committee is appointed for every piece of legislation that passes both houses in differing form.

To reach the floor for a final vote, a compromise proposal must receive a favorable vote of a majority of the committee members from each house to be reported out of the committee
Image 7.6 Representatives on the floor during an "annexation reform" bill. The electronic tally board in the background is used to tally the roll-call votes. Floor debate rarely influences how legislators will vote on a major billthey usually decide how they will vote long before the bill reaches the floor.
*CTQ What political factors affect legislators' decisions to support or oppose legislation?
홀
committee of the whole

The entire thirty-onemember senate acting as a committee.
conference committee A temporary committee that meets to resolve differences between Senate and House versions of a bill; a separate conference committee is appointed for each bill with differences between the House and Senate versions.


198
Chapter 7 The Legislature
conference committee report

A compromise between the House and Senate versions of a bill reached by a conference committee and then delivered to each house.
Did You Know? Former Texas Senator Bill Meier (D-Euless) set the world record for a filibuster in May 1977 by talking for 43 hours.
and back to the floor as the conference committee report. If a conference committee cannot resolve conflicts between the House and Senate versions of a bill, then the bill is not likely to go back to the floor for a final vote nor to reach the governor for signature.
After a bill has been reported from the conference committee, it may not be amended by either chamber; it must be accepted or rejected as it is written or sent back to the conference committee for further work. In practice, because of the volume of legislation that must be considered in the limited time available, the Texas House and Senate tend to accept the conference committee compromise between the House and Senate versions of a bill, and final passage is by a simple majority of both chambers.
How a Bill Becomes a Law
Figure 7.7 shows the basic steps the Texas Legislature uses to pass legislation. As you may recall, a bill can originate in either the House or the Senate. This diagram follows the state's General Appropriations Bill (HB 1) from its introduction in the House through to its final passage. The numbers in Figure 7.7 correspond to the numbers in the discussion that follows the diagram.
Figure 7.7 How a Bill Becomes a Law
The basic legislative steps are introduction, standing committee consideration, scheduling, and floor debate in each house. This diagram takes the appropriations bill (HB 1) through the legislature from introduction in the Texas House to signing by the governor. Other bills may originate in the Texas Senate and follow similar steps to passage.
House
Senate
1 Introduced
as HB 1
Introduced
as HB 1
2 Assigned to
Committee
Assigned to
Committee
3
Committee
Action
Subcommittee
Subcommittee
Committee
Action
4
Calendar
Calendar
5 House Floor
Action
11
Conference Committee
Senate Floor
Action
12
Final
Passage
12
Final
Passage
13
Action of the Governor
$\star$ CTQ Explain the role of the presiding officers as a bill works its way through the legislative process.
(C) 2018 Cengage Learning.


The Legislative Process
199
1. Introduction to the Texas House. Only a representative may introduce a bill in the House, and only a senator may do so in the Senate. Sometimes a senator and a representative agree to introduce the same bill (referred to as a companion bill) in each of their respective chambers to speed the process. Introduction is followed by a simple reading of the title or synopsis of the bill so it can be entered into the record; this is considered the bill's first reading. The first bill introduced in the House is the state appropriations bill, designated HB 1. As discussed previously, any bill introduced in the Senate would be given a number reflecting its origin in the Senate (e.g., Senate Bill 13, or SB 13).
2. Assignment to a committee. The speaker assigns bills to committees in the House based on their content. Naturally, the appropriations bill is assigned to the House Appropriations Committee. The speaker sometimes has flexibility as to which committee will initially review a bill because several committees have overlapping jurisdiction. In that case, the speaker can frequently determine the fate of the bill by sending it to a committee that will handle the bill the way the speaker wants. If in support of the bill, the speaker will refer it to a committee that will send a favorable report to the floor; if the speaker opposes the bill, it will be sent to a committee that will pigeonhole the bill, and it will not reach the floor for a vote.
3. House committee action. As noted earlier, committees are often called "little legislatures" because of the power they have over bills. In both the committee and the subcommittee, witnesses who support or oppose the bill may be allowed to testify. Witnesses may be lobbyists, concerned citizens, or bureaucrats who may be affected by the bill. The subcommittee then marks up the bill with changes and sends it to the committee, where it may be further marked up. The Appropriations Committee has subcommittees to initially consider the bill, but most House committees do not use subcommittees; in that case, the entire committee initially hears testimony and marks up the bill. Committees may then report on the bill favorably or unfavorably or may refuse to report on it at all.
4. House calendars. A bill that is reported favorably by the committee is placed on one of the house calendars by one of the calendars committees. This establishes the approximate order in which the whole House will consider the legislation.
5. House floor. The speaker of the house has the power to recognize representatives on the House floor and also to interpret the rules and points of order. The representative who sponsored the bill reads the bill before debate or voting begins. The size of the House necessitates that debate be more limited than in the Senate-usually 10 minutes for each member. Bills may be amended, tabled (indefinitely postponed), voted down, or sent back to committee. "Yea" votes of only a simple majority of members present and voting are necessary for a bill to be passed.
6. Introduction to the Texas Senate. After the House passes a bill, the bill is sent to the Senate but still carries the number assigned by the House (HB 1). Likewise, bills that have been first passed by the Senate will be sent to the House for consideration.
7. Assignment to a committee. The lieutenant governor assigns each bill to a Senate committee; deciding which committee will be the one to consider a bill frequently determines its fate.
8. Senate committee action. After committee assignment, the bill may be assigned to a subcommittee, which may want to hold public hearings and have witnesses testify. The subcommittee and then the whole committee may amend, totally rewrite, pigeonhole, or report favorably or unfavorably on a bill.
9. Senate calendar. As described earlier, the Senate has only one calendar of bills, which lists the bills in the order they come out of committee. The Senate calendar is rarely followed. In the usual procedure, a senator makes a motion to suspend the regular calendar order and consider a proposed bill out of sequence. The lieutenant governor must recognize the senator who will make the motion and if five-ninths of the senators agree, the bill is ready for action on the Senate floor.

200
Chapter 7 The Legislature
10. Senate floor. The president of the senate (the lieutenant governor) has the power to recognize senators who wish to speak, to vote in the event of a tie, and to interpret rules and points of order. At this time, the bill's sponsor may read the bill in its entirety in the Senate chamber. The Senate then debates the bill, perhaps adding amendments and passing the bill by a majority vote.
11. Conference committee. If the Senate makes changes in the House-passed version of a bill, a conference committee is necessary to resolve the differences between the two houses. A separate conference committee is selected for each bill on which House and Senate versions differ. The conference committee then reports the compromise version.
12. Final passage. The compromise version of the bill is sent first to the chamber where it originated and then to the other chamber for final approval. The final reading of a bill in both chambers happens at this time. Both the lieutenant governor and the speaker of the house must sign the passed version of the bill before it goes to the governor.
13. The governor. The governor has several options concerning an act arriving on his or her desk. First, the governor may sign it into law. Second, the governor may choose not to sign, in which case it becomes law in 10 days if the legislature is in session or in 20 days if the legislature is not in session. Third, the governor may choose to veto the act, but the veto can be overridden by a two-thirds vote in each house. The governor must either accept or veto the complete act if it does not contain provisions for appropriating funds. For appropriations acts, the governor may use the line-item veto to kill any budget item.
The governor often uses the veto late in the legislative session, or within 20 days after the session has ended, without fear of the legislature's overriding it because a veto cannot be overridden in a subsequent session. As discussed in Chapter 8, since 1945 only one veto has been overridden. If the governor signs a bill, it will become law in 90 days-sooner if the legislature has designated it as emergency legislation. If the act requires the expenditure of funds that have not already been designated for it, the comptroller of public accounts must certify that adequate revenue is available for its implementation or a four-fifths majority in each house would be required to allow deficit spending.

Polarization in the Texas Legislature
LO 7.5 Analyze the nature and evolution of ideological polarization in the Texas Legislature.

In Chapter 5, we discussed the growing polarization of the political parties as their positions have become more ideologically consistent, their supporters more passionate, and their policies further apart. Most observers believe that politics in Washington, D.C., as well as in Texas, is becoming more polarized and elites less compromising over the past 20 to 30 years; with this polarization increasingly evident in both the U.S. Congress and of the Texas Legislature. In fact, the data show that liberals and conservatives have indeed been drifting further apart.

The Evolution and Ideological Polarization in the Texas House

Figure 7.8 contains data from an analysis of roll call votes in the Texas House of Representatives for the 1973 to 2023 period using a methodology called DW-NOMINATE. ${ }^{14}$ DW-NOMINATE's first dimension, used in Figure 7.8, provides the position of each representative on the liberal-conservative dimension, along which most votes are cast in the Texas Legislature, based on the representative's roll-call voting behavior. Included in Figure 7.8 for each year is the average DW-NOMINATE score of the Democratic and Republican representatives in the Texas House of Representatives. The lower the score, the more liberal the average representative was, and the higher the score, the more conservative the average representative was.


Polarization in the Texas Legislature
201
Figure 1.8 The Evolution of Partisan Polarization in the Texas House: 1973-2023

The data show that, in 1973, the average Democrat and Republican were relatively close ideologically, with the Democratic mean -0.32 and the Republican mean -0.07 , for an overall difference of only 0.25 between the two parties. Twenty years later, the Democratic mean had moved notably to the left at -0.48 while the Republican mean had moved notably (albeit less so than the Democratic mean) to the right at 0.02, with the two parties in 1993 (the year before George W. Bush was first elected governor of Texas) separated by a gap of 0.50 , double that in 1973. Over the subsequent 20 years, the gulf separating the two parties continued to widen, with the mean ideological scores of the two parties in 2023 separated by 0.86 , with a Democratic mean of -0.69 and a Republican mean of 0.17 .

These data underscore the widening ideological chasm that divides Democrats and Republicans in the Texas House of Representatives. As is the case in the next section focusing on the Texas Senate, the partisan divide in the Texas House is also revealed by the fact that in 2023, every single Democrat was more liberal than every single Republican. That stands in sharp contrast to 1973 , when more than half of the members of the Democratic delegation in the House were more conservative than multiple Republicans.


202
Chapter 7 The Legislature
Ideology and Polarization in the Texas Senate
Political scientists have for decades used roll-call votes cast by members of the U.S. Congress to plot them on the liberal-conservative dimension along which most legislative politics now takes place. This ranking of the Texas Senate does the same-by drawing on the 2,728 nonlopsided roll-call votes taken during the 2023 regular session.

In Figure 7.9, Republicans are indicated by red dots and Democrats by blue ones (each senator's partisanship and legislative district number are next to their name in parentheses). Based on the roll-call vote analysis, it provides a mean ideal point for each senator, referred to as the Lib-Con Score, along with the 95 percent credible interval (CI) for that estimate. ${ }^{15}$

It's important to keep in mind that Republican senators can register Lib-Con Scores that are noticeably lower than those of most of their fellow Republicans while remaining conservative. It simply means they have voting records that are less conservative than most of their Republican colleagues. In 2023, every Republican senator's Lib-Con Score was significantly

Figure 1.9 Liberal—Conservative Position of Texas Senators: 2023


Applying What You Have Learned about the Texas Legislature
203
more conservative than that of every Democratic senator; every Democrat's score was significantly more liberal than every Republican's.

Republicans During the 2023 regular session the 19 Republican senators fell into four general groups in regard to their location on the ideological spectrum.

At the most conservative end of the GOP ideological continuum were three senators: Bryan Hughes of Mineola, Mayes Middleton of Galveston, and Bob Hall of Edgewood. Their Lib-Con Scores were significantly more conservative than those of all of the other 16 Republican senators.

A second group to the right of the GOP median consisted of six senators, ranging from Kelly Hancock of North Richland Hills to Phil King of Weatherford. A third GOP group primarily to the left of the GOP median consisted of nine senators, ranging from Tan Parker of Flower Mound to Pete Flores of Pleasanton.

At the least conservative end of the GOP ideological spectrum was a single senator, Robert Nichols of Jacksonville. Nichols had a Lib-Con Score that was significantly less conservative than those of 17 of his 18 Republican colleagues.

Democrats During the 2023 regular session the 12 Democratic senators fell into three general groups in regard to their location on the ideological spectrum.

At the most liberal end of the Democratic ideological continuum were two senators, Sarah Eckhardt of Austin and Roland Gutierrez of San Antonio. Both had Lib-Con Scores that were significantly more liberal than those of all of the 10 other Democrats.

At the least liberal end of the Democratic ideological continuum was a single senator, Juan "Chuy" Hinojosa of McAllen. His Lib-Con Score was significantly less liberal than those of every one of his 11 fellow Democrats.

The largest group of Democrats ( 9 total) was located between these two poles. It ranged from Borris Miles of Houston to César Blanco of El Paso.

Polarization Over the past 50 years the level of polarization in the Texas Legislature has steadily increased, reaching the point today where every Republican representative and senator is more conservative than every respective Democratic representative and senator, just as every Democratic representative and senator is more liberal than every respective Republican representative and senator. As a result, politics in the Texas Legislature is much more polarized between the Democratic and Republican parties than was the case just 25 years ago, let alone than was the case 50 years ago.

This polarization has fueled mistrust and conflict between members of the two parties, as well as members within each party. As a result, it has made it increasingly more difficult than in the past to reach a compromise on challenging, yet crucial, legislation in areas such as public education, health care, and taxes. Twenty-five years ago, the word capitulation, not compromise, was a dirty word in Texas politics, whereas today, for many Texas Democrats and Republicans, compromise is a mere synonym for capitulation, and something to be avoided rather than pursued.

Applying What You Have Learned about the Texas Legislature

LO 7.6 Apply what you have learned about the Texas Legislature.
You learned that the Texas Legislature meets in regular session every other year and only occasionally in special session when the governor summons such a session. You learned that limitations on the Texas Legislature have forced it to centralize power in the hands of the presiding


204
Chapter 7 The Legislature
officers; furthermore, the Texas Legislature has given the Texas Governor extraordinary emergency powers to act between legislative sessions. Given the concentration of power in the legislative process, we asked Senator Kolkhorst to explain her approach to the process during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Senator Lois Kolkhorst was first elected to the Texas Senate in 2014. She was subsequently reelected in 2016 and 2020. Prior to her arrival in the Senate, Kolkhorst served seven terms in the Texas House of Representatives from 2001 to 2014 in representation of her hometown of Brenham. Kolkhorst was chair of the Senate Committee on Health and Human Services during the 86th, 87th, and 88th Legislatures (2019-2025), and previously chaired the Senate Committee on Administration and the Senate Special Committee on Child Protective Services.

Politics in Practice Leadership Matters
by Lois Kolkhorst
Texas State Senator, Senate District 18
As a Texas lawmaker who has served for over two decades in the Texas House and Senate, I have had the opportunity to craft laws that impact every code within our state government, be it healthcare, education, transportation or criminal justice.

Being only the 17 th woman ever elected to the Texas Senate, I appreciate the struggles that those before me endured. And as a legislator tasked with charting the future of our state, I often draw inspiration from past profiles in leadership.

The Texas Legislature has a rich history of coming together to face difficult times. Serving nearly a million constituents, I have witnessed firsthand how flexible our state government can be when faced with a unique obstacle or crossroads.

In 2001, I was a freshman member of the Texas House when our state faced serious challenges after the September 11 terrorist attack on our nation. More recently, we have endured the first global pandemic of the modern age, with a disruptive virus suddenly forcing local, state and federal authorities to strike a balance between sweeping public health mandates and individual rights.

The onslaught of COVID-19 caused a unique situation for the Texas government, with the governor's emergency executive orders first issued in the spring of 2020. As the virus threat wore on, every major decision about how Texas would respond to the pandemic would rest solely on the governor's declared emergency powers until the Texas Legislature could reconvene in January of 2021.

The Texas Constitution compels the Legislature to convene on the second Tuesday in January of every odd-numbered year, and then meet for 140 days. Unless a "special session" is called by the governor, the Texas lawmaking process remains dormant for the subsequent year and half, known as the "interim."

Prior to COVID-19, if perhaps a hurricane or tornado required a governor to issue an emergency executive order, the process was likely to continue for a few days or weeks. In contrast, COVID-19 created a lasting public health crisis that lacked crucial details about the level of risk, or even the duration of the event.

With the Texas Legislature sidelined for months, the executive branch faced the difficult task of navigating the challenge alone. In the interest of public health and safety, Texas laws were


Applying What You Have Learned about the Texas Legislature
205
suspended and new policies were ordered, all determined exclusively by the executive branch during the onslaught of COVID-19.

Some executive orders, such as business restrictions, school closures, border checkpoints, or mask mandates, would have caused fierce legislative debates had these policies been considered by the Texas House and Senate.

When the 87th Legislative Session assembled in early 2021, legislators first adapted to the unfolding pandemic by amending rules to accommodate new challenges while still allowing public access. Accommodations were made to manage the threat of COVID-19, while also allowing committees to meet, witnesses to testify, and bills to pass with meaningful input from the public.

The collaborative spirit of the Texas Legislature endured, even during a global pandemic. Many of the pandemic orders implemented during the interim were reviewed and COVIDrelated solutions eventually emerged.

The point is that our executive, legislative and judicial branches of Texas government successfully address threats such as COVID-19 by embracing compromise, communication and public participation.

Texas has often drawn on its size and diversity. We find creative ways to improvise, adapt, and overcome obstacles. As we face the future, we must draw on our differences as a source of strength to solve common goals. At a time when some voices have sought to exploit our weaknesses and divisions, we must remember that true leadership seizes every setback as a hidden opportunity.

As a college athlete, I learned the importance of discipline, teamwork and flexibility. These are all traits that I still utilize in my role as a Texas Senator.

Inevitably, be it in sports or in politics, you will encounter conflicts that on the surface seem to have no reasonable solution. With enough focus, persistence and openness, any problem can be solved.

Before clenching a fist, first try an open hand and an open mind. In some cases, I have found that the spirit of cooperation is contagious, and it extends long after the original conflict is solved. Seek out common values, and solutions will follow.

Over the years, I have worked with lawmakers who span the political spectrum, because a good idea can come from the most unlikely source. Just as the Texas Legislature is designed to adapt to any challenge, the same ability to adapt and change is a key for lawmakers themselves if they want to achieve lasting results.

Public service can be filled with uncertainty, but a leader can remain strong when they are guided by the Texas values of fairness, transparency and determination.

Let truth, honesty and openness be our compass. Flexibility and compromise should be seen as strengths, not weaknesses. We should always listen to the other side, no matter how unreasonable they might seem at times.

And may we always hold these words to be true: Leadership matters.
Questions for Critical Thinking
1. What approach does Senator Kolkhorst say is necessary to achieve lasting results in the Legislature? How is it possible to achieve compromise in an institution as polarized as the Texas Legislature?
2. How do short and infrequent sessions affect the role of individual members of the Texas Legislature?