

L
ocal governments are responsible for a variety of services that substantially affect the public on a daily basis, including law enforcement, mass transit, sewage treatment,
flood control, and emergency services. Anyone who lives in a metropolitan area is likely to be governed by two general purpose governments—municipal and county govern-ments that provide a wide range of public services—in addition to numerous special districts, such as school districts, hospital districts, metropolitan transit authorities, and municipal utility districts. The sheer number of local governments across Texas and the rest of the nation can chal-Did You Know? Texas has more than 5,000 local governments, a majority of them governed by officials who are elected by voters. Only Illinois has more local governments than Texas.
lenge even the most interested members of a community who want to contact local officials about the critical needs of their own neighborhood, controversial social issues, or initiatives that can improve the community’s quality of life. (Table 11.1 shows the multitude of local governments in Texas and in the United States as a whole.) To more effectively make our views known to those who are responsible for making and enforcing policies at the local level, it is vital that we learn about the inner workings of local government—that is, the various institutional features of cities, counties, and special districts. And because so many local problems affect entire regions, it is equally important to examine the role that coun-cils of governments (COGs) play in bringing the variety of local governments together for the purposes of planning and coordinating policies.
Municipalities LO 11.1 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of municipal governments.
How are municipalities relevant to our lives? Cities hire police officers and firefighters to protect the community. Cities enforce building and safety codes, pass anti-litter ordinances, issue garage sale permits, treat sewage, control flooding, provide low-cost housing, supply safe drinking water, clear slums, collect garbage, maintain recycling programs, launch anti-graffiti programs, impound stray animals for the safety of the community, and provide public trans-portation. These are just a few examples of how cities routinely affect our day-to-day lives.
Table 11.1 Local Governments and Public School Systems, United States and Texas, 2017 This table shows the enormous numbers of local governments in the United States and in Texas.
Total County Municipal
United States 90,075 3,031 5,343
Texas 254
19,495 1,218
* Independent school districts and community college districts. U.S. Census Bureau, 2017 Census of Governments.
c How is it possible for ordinary voters to keep track of the numerous officials that they elect to local offices? Think of ways to simplify the system of local governments to make them more accountable to the average c
Table 11.2 Municipal Governments in Texas, 1952-2017
As general purpose governments, municipal governments provide a variety of services that are critically important to the well-being of communities.
1952
1972
1982
1992
2002
2012
2017
738
1962
866
981
1,121
1,171
1,196
1,212
1,218
U.S. Census Bureau, 2017 Census of Governments.
How are city governments established?
Table 11.2 shows that Texas has experienced a marked increase in the number of cities formed since the 1950s. The process of forming a city is known as incorporation. In Texas, this requires voters in a community to petition the county judge to call an election to establish a municipality. The population required to propose a city and the number of signatures required on the petition depends are type of city to be established, although at least 50 signatures are required and the population of the proposed city must be greater than 200 to establish even the smallest municipality.
General Law and Home Rule Cities
Cities are classified as either general law or home rule cities. A general law city is an incor- porated community with a population of 5,000 or fewer and is limited to choosing among three structures permitted by the Texas Local Government Code. The vast majority of Texas cities-about 75 percent are these smaller general law cities.
A city with a population of more than 5,000 may, by majority vote, become a home rule city and may retain this designation even if its population drops below this threshold. This means that it can adopt its own city charter (the organizing document for a municipality) and structure its local government as it sees fit, as long as charter provisions and local laws (called ordinances) do not violate national and state constitutions and laws.
The Limits of Home Rule Although home rule cities have wider latitude than general law cities in their day-to-day operations, they are subordinate to state authority and subject to its rules governing local governments. For example, state law determines the specific dates when municipal elections can be held, how cities annex new territory, and which cit- ies can establish metropolitan transit authorities. Local governments in Texas are subject to "sunshine" laws, such as the Public Information Act and the Open Meetings Act.
Furthermore, because local governments operate within the framework of state laws, their policies are subject to preemption by the state. Preemption is the legal doctrine that a higher level of government can limit the power of a lower government to regulate a specific issue. The state has used this concept to resolve conflicts that have developed as several large home rule cities have adopted more progressive policies at a time when the state as a whole has become
more conservative.
After some liberal home rule cities passed a variety of labor-protection ordinances to man-
date that employees be allowed paid sick leave and that outdoor workers be allowed scheduled
water breaks, the conservative Texas Legislature in 2023 passed a broad preemption law that
bars local governments from passing ordinances that go beyond state law in protecting work-
ers or in regulating broad areas of agriculture, natural resources, or finance. Although the law
allows municipalities to continue to pass ordinances on subjects not regulated by the state,
the power of home rule cities has now been considerably reduced.


Forms of Municipal Government The three usual forms of municipal governments are council–manager, mayor–council, and commission. And among these, the council-manager form is clearly the most common in Texas.
Council–Manager System In a council–manager form of government, an elected city coun-cil passes ordinances and makes policies; it then hires a professional administrator to carry them out. Serv-ing at the pleasure of the council, the manager imple-ments city policies and manages the day-to-day operations of the municipal government. Figure 11.1 shows how the council–manager form is organized. The city charter and the council assign power to
★ CTQ How are mayors in a council–manager system able to develop political power despite formal limits on the power of their office?
council–manager form of government A form of government in which an elected city council makes laws and hires a professional administrator who is responsible for both executing council policies and managing the day-to-day operations of city government.
the city manager. The city manager is usually respon-sible for selecting key personnel and for submitting a proposed budget to the council for its approval. The city council will likely seek the manager’s opinion on a wide variety of matters, including what tax rate the city should adopt, whether or not the city should call a bond
Figure 11.1 The Council–Manager Form of City Government This figure shows the council–manager form of city government that is used in most Texas cities. In this form, the voters elect the city council, which then appoints a professional manager to manage the day-to-day operations of ci


election, and the feasibility of proposed new ordinances. But these issues are ultimately up to the council, and the city manager is expected to implement whatever decisions the council makes. In a council–manager form of government, the mayor may be either selected by the coun-cil from among its members or independently elected by the voters. The mayor presides over council meetings, has limited or no veto power, and has for the most part only the same legis-lative authority as members of the council. The mayor does have some important ceremonial duties, such as signing proclamations and serving as the chief spokesperson for the city. Although the office is institutionally weak, a high-profile and charismatic mayor can wield
considerable political influence because access to publicity gives the mayor a platform to develop a loyal political following. Mayors of the two largest Texas cities using the council–manager system, former San Antonio mayors Henry Cisneros and Julián Castro and former Dallas mayor Ron Kirk, went on to be appointed as major federal officials. The idea of the council–manager city structure began as part of a reform movement during
the Progressive Era (1900–1920). Reformers were attempting to substitute “efficient and busi-nesslike management” for the then prevalent system of boss rule, in which politics was the key consideration in city hall decisions. Although the council–manager system is seen as a means of separating politics from the administration of city government, critics charge that its prin-cipal shortcoming is that the voters do not directly elect the chief executive officer of the city.
Mayor–Council System Although most of the larger Texas cities now use a council–manager system, a few, including Houston and Pasadena, still use a mayor–council system to govern their cities. This system, which consists of a mayor and a city council, is often characterized according to the strength of the mayor, which varies along a continuum between mayors who are quite strong within their city government to weak ones who share power with numerous other officeholders. In the strong mayor form of government, the mayor, who is
chosen in a citywide election, is both the chief executive and the leader of the city council. The mayor makes appointments, prepares the budget, and is responsible for the management of city govern-ment. The mayor also sets the council agenda, proposes policy, and in some cities may veto council actions. Figure 11.2 shows the orga-nizational structure of the strong mayor form. Supporters of this form of government argue for strong political
leadership in which the chief executive is directly accountable to voters, but critics of the strong mayor system fear that the office is too powerful and may become too politicized to distribute city ser-vices fairly or efficiently. This system conjures up the image of nine-teenth-century urban political party machines led by mayors who appointed political cronies as department heads, hired campaign workers as city employees, and awarded contracts to supporters. The strong mayor form of government was the target of urban
reformers in the early twentieth century, but it did not completely die out. Instead, it was often restructured to include an elected city controller to separate the city’s chief financial office from control by the mayor’s office. Rules were also adopted to require that most contracts be awarded to the lowest and best bidder. Other reforms in strong mayor systems have included nonpartisan elections as well as ethics and campaign finance laws. In some cities, the strong mayor was stripped of the power to veto city ordinanc


Figure 11.2 The Strong Mayor–Council Form of City Government This figure shows the strong mayor form of city government such as the one used in Houston. Voters directly elect the mayor to serve as chief executive in charge of day-to-day city operations. Review the differences between the strong mayor-council form and the council-manager form at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s P54bvzocRs
The best Texas example of the strong mayor form is Houston, which has adopted most of
weak mayor form of government The form of municipal government in which the mayor shares ad-ministrative power with the council and other elected or appointed officers.
these structural reforms. In addition, Houston’s mayor now appoints professional administra-tive assistants who help manage city departments, but the mayor can still be held accountable for mismanagement by being voted out of office. By contrast, in the weak mayor form of government the mayor shares administrative
power with the council and, sometimes, with numerous other elected or appointed officers, as shown in Figure 11.3. For example, city council members may have the power to draft the city budget or give commands to city officials. Sometimes, city officers such as the treasurer or city attorney are elected by voters and operate independently from the mayor in a plural executive system. In some weak mayor cities, multimember boards, rather than the mayor, supervise the day-to-day operations of a number of city administrative agencies. Clearly, weak mayor cities vary a great deal in their structures, but they share the common feature that the mayor has less administrative control than in strong mayor systems. In fact, some mayors are so insignifi-cant they are not even elected citywide; instead, the council simply selects one of its own members to preside over their meetings and serve as a ceremonial leader at community events. The weak mayor form of city government lacks unified lines of authority because the
mayor and council share administrative responsibility. Some city officials are elected, oth-ers are selected by the council, and only a few may be appointed by the mayor. As a result, administrative power is decentralized and voters find it too difficult to know which officials to hold accountable when problems and mismanagement occur. No major Texas city uses the weak mayor system, though some smaller general law municipalities operate effectively as weak mayor citie

Figure 11.4 Commission Form of City Government The commission form of city government illustrated here was invented in Galveston, Texas, following the great hurricane of 1900 as a way to efficiently manage emergency response to natural disasters and was subsequently adopted by many cities across the nation. Most cities including Galveston later abandoned this structure and, today, few cities use this form, with the notable exception of Portland, Orego
Several other states use partisan elections to select city officials. Supporters of partisan elec- tions argue that party labels provide voters with useful cues as to how a candidate will govern. Parties are useful because they help winnow the field of potential candidates, unlike in Texas where dozens of candidates sometimes clutter municipal election ballots. Parties mobilize more voters and generate greater public interest than do nonpartisan campaigns. Critics of nonpartisan elections argue that they are dominated by low-visibility special interests with much to gain from city contracts and with enough money to hire campaign workers and to flood the airwaves and digital media with campaign ads.
Texas law requires that municipal elections be nonpartisan, but cities have options when it comes to adopting single-member districts or at-large election systems. And as you will see, the decision to use one system or the other has enormous legal and political consequences.
Council Election Areas Some cities do not use districts at all. Instead, they use
at-large elections, which are citywide elections in which some or all of the city council mem- bers are elected by voters of the entire municipality rather than from neighborhood districts. At-large systems are of two types.
Some smaller Texas cities use a pure at-large system, in which all candidates for city coun- cil run citywide and the top vote-getters are elected to fill the number of open seats. Voters are allowed to cast as many votes as there are open seats, with the winning candidates being those
who receive the most votes. For example, if 20 candidates run for six seats, the six candidates getting the most votes are elected. In pure at-large systems, voters are usually allowed to cast only one vote per candidate, but
a few cities such as Andrews, Texas, allow for cumulative voting whereby individuals may cast more than one of their allotted council votes for a single candidate. Such an electoral system affords an organized political minority the opportunity to win a seat on the council by con-centrating its votes on one favored candidate. Other Texas cities use an at-large place system—each candidate runs citywide for a spe-cific seat on the council and voters cast one vote for each seat or place. For example, on a seven-member city council, the ballot would show perhaps several candidates running for place 1, different candidates running for place 2, and still others running for each place down through place 7. Voters would be able to cast one vote for each of the seven seats, and the candidate winning the majority of votes cast citywide would win each particular seat. Varia-tions of the at-large system may require a specific candidate to live in a particular district of the city, but the candidates are still elected by all of the voters in the city; hence, the majority political group in the city has the potential to sweep most or all of the council positions. In contrast, in a system with single-member council districts, each council member is
elected from a particular geographic district by only the voters who live in that district. See Figure 11.5 on page 314 for an example from the City of Fort Worth. The relative merits of the at-large and single-member systems of election have been debated
for decades in Texas and across the nation. Supporters of at-large elections say that they pro-mote the public interest because council members must take a citywide view of problems. They charge that council members elected from districts are focused on the needs of their district rather than the interests of the community as a whole. They oppose single-member districts, claiming that the election of individuals who have an outlook limited to their district makes it difficult for the council to build a consensus about the future of the city. On the other hand, critics of at-large elections maintain that the system allows a simple
majority of voters to elect all council members and that, consequently, the interests of racial, eth-nic, and ideological minorities in the community are not represented at city hall. They support single-member districts, arguing that effective neighborhood representation reflects the diverse interests of the city; neighborhoods where political, cultural, racial, and ethnic minorities live have a chance to elect at least some members to the city council when a district system is used. Although several major Texas cities adopted single-member districts in order to promote
diverse neighborhood representation on their city councils, a number of cities resisted them. As a result, civil rights organizations challenged the legality of at-large city council elections, arguing that they discriminate against racial and ethnic minorities. The Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund (MALDEF), the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC), the American GI Forum, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), Texas Rural Legal Aid, and the Southwest Voter Registration Education Project brought successful legal actions, and the federal courts forced several cities to abandon at-large elections in favor of single-member districts. Among Texas’s largest cities, Dallas, San Antonio, Ft. Worth, Austin, and El Paso now
elect members of their city councils from single-member districts and only their mayors are elected at-large. However, some cites have instituted a mixed system in which a majority of the council members are elected from single-member districts, but some of the council members along with the mayor are elected at large. Mixed systems have also been challenged as discriminatory. Houston, for example, elects
eleven council members from single-member districts, but also elects five city council members as well as the mayor in citywide elections. LULAC has sued the City of Houston in an attempt to end the practice of electing at-large council members and, instead, elect all 16 council members from single-member distric
gure 11.5 Fort Worth City Council Districts This map of Fort Worth’s single-member city council districts was adopted in 2022 following the most recent U.S. Census. Each district is approximately equal in population and each elects one of the eleven members of the city council
Term Limits Mayors and members of city councils in Texas are elected for terms of two, three, or four years depending on the city charter. In some cities, these officials may serve as many terms as voters wish to elect them. However, there has been a movement toward impos-ing term limits—that is, restrictions on the number of times that a politician can be reelected to an office or the number of years that a person may hold a particular office. Proponents o
Money and Power in Municipal Elections
Municipal elections in Texas may be officially nonpartisan but they are far from being nonpolitical. City council campaigns in smaller municipalities and single-member districts can be inexpensive person-to-person neighborhood affairs, but candidates running in major cities, and especially for citywide offices, must organize large-scale, costly operations that involve extensive media and public relations efforts.
For example, the 2019 race for Houston mayor cost a record-setting $22 million in which Tony Buzbee spent $12 million of his own money in his unsuccessful effort to unseat incumbent Mayor Sylvester Turner, who received at least 41 percent of his contributions from city vendors or contractors that had a financial interest in the election outcome. Among Turner's contributors were employees of Kelsey- Siebold Clinic, the provider of city employee health benefits; executives of IMS Engineers, that provide planning for environmental, transportation, structural, water resources, and wastewater engineering; and the employees and political action committee of IDS, a civil engineering firm that specializes in water supply, sewerage, and flood control. About 300 companies that contributed to Turner's campaign had received contracts from the city, including unions, homebuilders, and real estate professionals.
Aside from the magnitude of contributions, Houston's mayoral campaign is not unique. City clerks or secretaries receive and archive campaign finance reports, and their websites in large cities across the state reveal frequent contributions from individuals and organizations that have a direct interest in municipal policies and contracts." For example, among the many law firms donating money to municipal campaigns
is Linebarger Goggan Blair & Simpson, LLC, which specializes in debt collection for city governments including unpaid property taxes, fees, and fines. Donors also include a variety of architecture and civil engineering outfits, such as the HDT, Inc. political action committee (PAC), interested in infrastructure contracts, flood control, and other construction projects. Other contributors include AT&T PAC with interests in cable and telecommunication contracts and the Texas Real Estate PAC with interests in tax policies, real estate development, and city planning.
Members of municipal employee organizations, which also have a direct interest in city policies, contribute money and volunteer for political campaigns. For example, firefighter and police officer associations enjoy considerable public support, issue coveted political endorsements, and deploy impressive political influence through such organizations as the Texas State Association of Firefighters (TSAFF), the Combined Law Enforcement Associations of Texas (CLEAT), the Texas Municipal Police Association (TMPA), and their local affiliates. Law enforcement and firefighter associations are especially powerful because they are the only public employee unions that have the right to bargain collectively with city governments to negotiate contracts specifying wages, working conditions, and disciplinary procedures'; such labor contracts and political power complicate efforts to hold law enforcement officers accountable for misconduct.
term limits believe that city hall is best governed by new blood and fresh ideas and that limit ing the number of terms for mayors and council members is the best way to achieve that goal. Opponents, though, worry that cities stand to lose experienced, effective council members because of term limits.
In Dallas, both city council members and the mayor can serve up to eight years, with the mayor limited to two four-year terms and council members limited to four two-year terms. But after meeting these limits and sitting out a single term, both the mayor and council members can seek office again. Houston, San Antonio, Austin and Corpus Christi ser term limits of eight years and many other cities also limit their mayors' and council-members' terms in office.
Direct Democracy at the Municipal Level A city council may submit a proposal directly to voters for their approval in a referendum, but city charters may also per- mit local voters themselves to impose their will directly on government through initiative, referendum, and recall; and most home rule cities have all three options.
Local citizens can propose an initiative by obtaining the signatures of a specified percent- age of registered voters on a petition that can force a sometimes-reluctant city council to place proposed ordinance or charter amendment on the ballot. If the proposition passes by majority vote, it becomes law. Texas cities have recently used initiatives to resolve the following issues by popular vote:
⚫ Should a city enforce marijuana laws?
⚫ Should a city allow homeless people to camp in public areas?
Should a city use cameras to enforce red light violations?
⚫ Should a city impose a cap on the property tax rate?
• Should a city replace the council-manager system with a mayor-council form?
Houston voters approved a proposition to remove red light cameras. Austin rejected a pro- posal to replace its council-manager system and passed one to ban camping in public areas. Austin, Denton, Kileen, Elgin and Harker Heights adopted referenda to prevent city officials from enforcing laws against possession of small quantities of marijuana, though these may be invalidated by the state and are not being implemented by city officials. Several cities have passed proposals to cap property taxes for the elderly and disabled.
Finally, voters can, by petition, force the council to hold a recall election that would permit voters to remove the mayor or a member of the council before the official's term expires. A city's charter specifies how many registered voters must sign a recall petition before an election is scheduled to remove the official in question. In 2022, Denton recalled one of its council members, and a number of recall efforts have recently been mounted in such cities as Alice, Conroe, and LaMarque.
Revenue Sources and Limitations
The local political culture determines expectations about appropriate standards of services and
tolerable levels of taxation. External forces-such as a downturn in the national economy, the
closing of a military base, the shuttering of industries, federal and state mandates, and natural
disasters also influence the economic climate of a community.
The sources and amount of revenue used to meet a city's budgetary obligations vary greatly among Texas municipalities according to various factors, including the following:
The size of the city's population
The amount and type of taxes a city is allowed and willing to levy ⚫ The total assessed value of taxable property within the city limits
• The needs of the residents
City revenues can also depend on how much aid money is available from the state and national governments.
Sales Taxes Most Texas cities have adopted a 1 percent sales tax. Cities in the most populous counties collect an additional sales tax up to 1 percent for economic development projects. Mass transit authorities and other special districts also collect sales taxes, but total local sales taxes are capped at 2 percent.
Figure 11.6 shows that Texas cities are heavily dependent on the sales tax, which make up more than a quarter of their revenues. Although all taxes are affected by economic conditions, sales tax revenue is more sensitive to economic fluctuations than is property tax revenue. And because budgetary problems make state and national government assistance unreliable, cities need to build into their budgets a reserve fund to compensate for these inconsistent sources of revenue.
Property Taxes Figure 11.6 shows that municipalities are also heavily dependent on
ad valorem property taxes (making up more than a third of their revenues), in which the tax rate is a percentage of the assessed value of real estate. In a community with a small tax base, or total assessed value, the local government has a limited capacity to raise revenue from this source. Thus, a property-poor city must set a very high tax rate to provide adequate services. Furthermore, any drop in property values causes a decline in the city's tax base.
Texas has established a countywide appraisal authority for property taxes, and all local governments must accept its property appraisals. However, Texas state law does not require full disclosure of the sales price of real estate, making it difficult to accurately appraise property values, especially those of large commercial and industrial properties.
Figure 11.6 Texas Municipal Finances: General Revenue and Expenditures
This chart shows where Texas municipalities get their revenues and how they spend them. The largest share of city revenue is the property tax, followed by sales taxes and various fees. The majority of municipal expenditures are for protective services such as police, fire, and emergency services.
Limits on Property Taxes The property tax rate of general law cities depends on
the size of the city, but the maximum property tax rate of a general law city is $1.50 per $100 of the assessed value of a city's property. Home rule municipalities can set property tax rates as high as $2.50 per $100 of assessed value.
Even though no Texas city approaches these limits, property taxes have been extremely controversial, and some Texas cities have taken measures to limit their increase. For example, Corpus Christi's city charter sets a property tax cap of $0.68 per $100 valuation except for taxes to finance voter-approved bonds. Texas cities, towns, counties, and community college districts may freeze property taxes for the disabled and the elderly. Texas cities, as well as counties and hospital districts, may also call an election to lower property taxes by raising their sales, excise, and use taxes.
Cities, counties, and most other taxing units must hold a referendum before allowing property tax revenue to rise more than 3.5 percent annually. Community college and hospital districts must hold tax ratification elections to authorize property tax revenue to grow more than 8 percent from the previous year.
User Fees Fees paid by the individuals who receive a particular government service are called user fees. Such charges are increasingly popular because voters often oppose higher taxes and generally believe that people should pay for what they actually use. Cities may charge fees for city-provided electricity, water, sewage, and garbage collection, as well as swimming pools, golf courses, and ambulance services. The Texas Municipal League has found that user fees bring in approximately 20 percent of municipal revenue. Permits, business licenses, and inspection fees round out the usual sources of city revenue.
Public Debt Local governments use public debt, which is money owed by government, ordinarily through the issuance of bonds. With voter approval, local governments issue bonds to finance major infrastructure projects such as roads, buildings, and public facilities. Texas law explicitly limits the amount of long-term debt that a local government can assume to a percentage of assessed valuation of property within the boundaries of the government. This restriction is intended to keep local governments from going bankrupt, as many did during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Municipalities: Issues, Trends, and Controversies
Several trends and issues dominate city politics; understanding the dynamics of municipal policy making requires us to focus on population changes, federal and state mandates, and annexation issues.
Population Growth and Annexation Table 11.3 shows that Texas major cit ies have experienced spectacular population growth during the twenty-first century, allow ing Texas to boast five of the fifteen largest cities in the nation. Medium-sized cities such as Conroe, Denton, Frisco, Georgetown, Leander, McKinney, New Braunfels, and Plano are also among those growing at a phenomenal rate.
Growing cities must expand services ranging from sewage treatment, street building, and
law enforcement to urban planning and parks and recreation. Even a city with limited growth may see an internal shift in population, with one area of the city facing dramatic growth whereas others contend with a loss of population and businesses, vacant buildings, and urban decay. Communities with stagnant or declining populations also face the challenge of funding services from a diminished economic base. Cities with increasingly diverse, elderly, or young populations may face competing demands from the public, which will necessitate hard choices, especially if local revenue is limited.
corporated areas into their jurisdiction, a process known as annexation. Besides voluntary annexation of areas that requested to become part of a municipality, a major city could annex adjoining areas equal to as much as 10 percent of its existing territory each year without hold-ing an election. Supporters of such broad annexation power argued that it allowed cities to protect their tax base to finance expensive city services and mitigate the problem of urban decay. Without broad annexation powers, cities would suffer as more prosperous residents flee central cities to low-tax suburbs, leaving core cities with hollowed-out neighborhoods and a depleted tax base from which to finance essential services such as law enforcement, cultural institutions, transportation projects, and economic development that benefit the entire metropolitan area. In unincorporated areas around major Texas cities, some opponents of involuntary annexation
argued that it limited their opportunity for self-government, and they resented taxation and regu-lation by central-city governments that do not share their political values; they argued that large cities have run roughshod over residents, annexing property without the owners’ consent, forcing them to pay higher taxes for services they oftentimes do not want. The Texas Legislature recently responded to these complaints by passing a series of annexation reform bills that allow residents in most areas proposed for annexation to demand an election to decide whether a city can bring them under its jurisdiction. Today, except for city-owned land, airports, reservoirs, and roadway right-of-way, Texas cities may generally annex areas only with voter or landowner approval.9 Short of annexation, municipalities still maintain some control over growth and development
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) A buffer area that
extends beyond a city’s limits.
in adjacent areas. Municipalities have the power to establish a buffer area, or extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), that extends one-half mile to as far as five miles beyond the city’s limits, depending on the city’s population. Cities may enforce zoning and building codes and new cities may not be incorporated within their ETJs, allowing cities to plan their growth and preventing other suburban “bedroom” cities from forming to choke off their expansion.
Demographic and Cultural Changes Not only have many city populations grown in size, but they have also become increasingly diverse as the burgeoning Latino popula-tion directly affects most Texas cities. Political competition among Latinos, Anglos, African Americans, and Asian Americans increases pressure on elected officials to factor ethnic, racial, and social considerations into their policy decisions. In none of Texas’s largest cities do Anglos now comprise an absolute majority of the popu-Did You Know? Most states have found counties a useful governing tool to provide state services at the local level. Today, all but the small states of Rhode Island and Connecticut use counties or their equivalent, though in Louisiana, they are known as parishes.
lation. African Americans account for more than one-fifth of the residents of Dallas and Houston. Latinos constitute more than one-third of the population in Austin and Fort Worth, more than 40 percent in Dallas and Houston, over 60 percent in San Antonio, and 80 percent in El Paso. Houston is the home of the state’s larg-est Asian American community and of the largest number of undocumented immigrants. The vast majority of these diverse groups are citizens, but
perhaps 1.9 million unauthorized immigrants live in Texas, many of them Latinos in Texas cities.10
Most Texas cities had
a policy of honoring federal requests to hold undocumented immigrants for deportation after they were arrested, but several did not routinely ask people about their immigration status believing that undocumented immigrants may be less willing to report crimes or cooperate with police if doing so might result in deportation, and at the same time lawful city residents may resent local law enforcement demanding proof of citizenship, especially if they are being singled out for questioning because of their ethnicity. However, these policing practices came under scrutiny by advocates of immigration enforcement and the Travis County sheriff defiantly announced she would not honor some

federal detainer requests. The Texas Legislature's response was to pass SB 4, the "sanctuary cities" bill, which requires law local law enforcement to cooperate with federal immigration authorities, and it allows local police to inquire about a person's immigration status during encounters such as traffic stops.
Cities must also come to grips with other cultural changes, such as the demands for LGBTQ rights. Because state law does not prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity, many major Texas cities have passed various ordinances to protect sexual minorities. Among them, Dallas, Austin, San Antonio, Fort Worth, and Plano have passed nondiscrimination ordinances that forbid businesses from denying employment or services based on sexual orientation. Houston's city council also passed a similar ordinance, but it was repealed by voters in a 2015 referendum.
Government Mandates Texas cities like most cities in the nation-have seen both federal and state governments cut funding even as they have increased the number of mandates imposed on local governments. A mandate is a federal or state requirement that a lower level of government, like a city or county, provide a service or meet certain standards, often as a condition for receiving financial aid. The federal government has imposed many such mandates as a condition for state or local governments to receive grants-in-aid. Some notable examples of federal mandates are the Americans with Disabilities Act, the National Voter Registration Act (Motor Voter Act), the Help America Vote Act, and the No Child Left Behind Act. Like- wise, the state has imposed innumerable mandates on school districts, counties, and cities.
Supporters of mandates argue that they permit the federal and state governments to meet important needs in a uniform fashion. Critics charge that mandates-particularly those that are unfunded impose a heavy financial burden on the governments that are required to fulfill the obligations they impose.
The Unfunded Mandates Interagency Work Group, including the state auditor, comptrol- ler, director of the Legislative Budget Board, a senator (selected by the lieutenant governor), and a representative (selected by the speaker), keeps a record of unfunded mandates the legis- lature passes. Mandates exempt from the list include those passed by voters and those adopted to comply with the Texas Constitution, federal law, or a court order.
Counties
LO 11.2 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of county governments.
Texas established its 254 counties in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries for the purpose of providing public services in all areas of the state. Local access to state services was especially important when transportation and communication were extremely slow by modern standards, and a result, the map of most counties located the county courthouse a horseback ride away for most residents. And because of its size, Texas has created more counties than any other state.
Functions of Counties
County governments are established by the state constitution and the legislature as general purpose local governments that also serve as an administrative arm of the state, carrying out the state's policies. County officers arrest, try, and jail violators of state laws; collect a number of state taxes and fees; and administer county, state, and national elections. County governments act for the state securing right-of-way for highways; registering births, deaths, and marriages; registering motor vehicles; recording land titles and deeds; and providing the courthouses that house state courts and the other offices that provide these state services.

ounty governments may also provide additional services specifically authorized by state
law. For example, they may establish and maintain libraries, operate and maintain parks, estab-lish recreational or cultural facilities such as auditoriums or convention centers, and appoint county historical commissions. Counties may build and maintain county roads, hospitals, museums, and historical sites; they may provide public services ranging from flood control to fire protection and waste disposal as well as public health and welfare services. They are respon-sible for providing juvenile services, managing health emergencies, and providing disaster relief. The services that counties actually provide vary a great deal from one county to the next.
commissioners court
The policy-making body of a county, consisting of a county judge, who serves as the presiding officer of the court, and four commissioners elected from individual
precincts for four-year terms.
county judge An official elected countywide for a four-year term to preside over the county commissioners court.
State laws allow some counties to provide some of these services and not others. Many of these services are optional and depend on the policy decisions of the governing body in each county. However, counties do not have the flexibility of cities because they do not have the option of home rule. Instead, each county function must be specifically authorized by either the state constitution or state law.
Image 11.3 County judges preside over meetings of the county commissioners but are not true chief executives because they share power with numerous other independently elected county officers. Nevertheless, county judges are the single most powerful of these county officers, often taking the lead during natural disasters and health crises. Here Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo coordinates the county’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Structure and Organization of Counties The county governing body, the commissioners court, consists of the county judge, serving as the presiding officer, and four county commissioners elected from separate precincts. Despite its misleading name, com-missioners court is not a judicial body; rather, it is a policy-making body with authority to approve the budget for all county operations, set the tax rate, adopt optional county pro-grams, approve contracts, make certain appointments, and pass ordinances on a narrow range of topics. The commissioners court does not have direct control over the many elected depart-ment heads in county government, but it wields considerable influence through its budgetary power. The sheriff, for example, is responsible to county voters for enforcing the law and maintaining order and security in the county jail, but the quality of law enforcement depends a great deal on county commissioners’ decisions. The commissioners court must provide the funds to build a jail and approve its staff, authorize expenditures for each patrol vehicle and its gas and repairs, and authorize deputies, clerks, and their salaries. The county judge is an official elected county-★ CTQ Is the county judge a true chief executive? Why or why not?
★ CTQ Analyze the powers of independently elected county officials. Is it accurate to describe county administration as a plural executive system?
wide for a four-year term to preside over the com-missioners court. In addition, the county judge has administrative functions that include helping prepare a budget proposal in smaller counties; supervising election-related activities such as calling elections, posting election notices, and receiving and canvass-ing election results; performing marriage ceremonies; and serving as the head of civil defense and disaster relief for the county (see Image 11.3). In addition, a county judge may have judicial authority in many of the less populous counties. Four county commissioners elected for four-year
terms comprise the remaining membership of the court. Commissioners are elected in single-member districts, or precincts, as they are called in Texas. The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that these four com-missioner precincts must be roughly equal in popula-tion based on the one-person, one-vote princi
Collectively, county commissioners are policymakers as they serve on commissioners court,
but individually they are also administrators responsible for building and maintaining county roads and bridges within their respective precincts, except in counties that have hired a road engineer. Each is given a certain amount of money and has almost total authority to determine how it will be spent on roads and bridges in their area. Residents of rural areas often consider building and maintaining roads to be the commissioners’ primary responsibility, and thus, they have historically been called “road engineers.” Much of the remaining executive or administrative function of the county is divided among
several law enforcement, financial, clerical, and legal officers who are elected countywide for four year terms in the partisan general election at the same time that state officials are elected. Law enforcement officers are the county sheriff and constables. The sheriff is the chief county
law enforcement officer. Next to the county judge, the sheriff is usually the most powerful county officer because he or she has a relatively large budget and staff of deputies to assist in enforcing state law throughout the county. Within the corporate limits of cities, the sheriff usually refrains from patrolling to better use scarce resources and avoid jurisdictional disputes with the city police. The sheriff’s department also operates the county jail and delivers and executes court orders. Constables are county law enforcement officials who are elected to serve as the process
officers of justice of the peace courts and also have general law enforcement powers. Constables are elected from the same precincts as justices of the peace. They deliver summonses and exe
court orders. In some metropolitan counties, constables have added many deputies and have become important law enforcement agencies, but in others the office is so unimportant that it remains unfilled, and some county commissioners have abolished the office altogether.
Financial officers of the county include the tax assessor-collector, the treasurer, and the auditor. The responsibilities of the tax assessor-collector include collecting various county taxes and fees and, in some counties, registering voters. Additional responsibilities include collecting certain state taxes and fees, particularly motor vehicle registration fees (license plate fees) and the motor vehicle sales tax.
In many counties, the county treasurer is responsible for receiving, depositing, and disbursing funds. However, some counties have transferred this function to the county audi- tor. Although the treasurer holds a constitutional office, several counties have asked the legislature to propose statewide constitutional amendments to abolish this office in their counties on a county-by-county basis.
The county auditor reviews all county financial records and ensures that expenditures are made in accordance with the law. Whereas other key county officials are elected, the county auditor is appointed to a two-year term by district judges.
Clerical officers in the county are the county and district clerks. The county clerk serves as the county's chief record keeper. In some ways, the office parallels that of the Texas secretary of state. The county clerk's duties include serving as clerk for the commissioners court; maintain- ing records for justices of the peace and county courts; filing mortgages, wills, and contracts; issuing marriage licenses and maintaining certain records of births and deaths; and serving on the county election board, certifying candidates running for county office, and carrying out other housekeeping functions, such as preserving the results of state, county, and special district elections. In the smallest counties, the county clerk also maintains records for district courts, but most counties elect a separate district clerk to serve as the chief record keeper for district courts.
The county attorney is a county legal officer whose responsibilities may include giving legal advice to the commissioners court and representing the county in civil litigation, whereas the district attorney is the officer who prosecutes most criminal cases. In a few of the largest counties, the office of county attorney has been abolished and the district attorney's office has been given the responsibility of handling civil matters in addition to the usual task of prosecut- ing most crime in the county.
Some counties have other executive officers, such as five or more members of a county board of school trustees, a county superintendent of schools, a county surveyor, and a county weigher. Counties may authorize such appointive officers as the county elections administrator, county health officer, county medical examiner, county agricultural agent, and county housing director.
Counties: Issues, Trends, and Controversies
The institutional features of Texas county government are largely a product of the nineteenth century, yet the demands of modern society are placing an increasingly heavy burden on this level of government. Reformers have frequently cited criticisms of county government and proposed measures counties can take to deal with contemporary problems.
Constitutional Rigidity County government is far less flexible than municipal gov-
ernment in its organization and functions. Texas counties do not have home rule and cannot
pass ordinances unless the state legislature specifically authorizes them to do so. New statutes
or constitutional amendments are often necessary to allow the county to deal with contempo-
rary problems; many state laws apply to only one specific county's unique circumstances and
do not grant flexibility to counties throughout the state. The needs of Harris, Dallas, Tarrant,
and Bexar Counties are far different from small rural counties, half of which have popula-
tions of fewer than 20,000. For example, Harris County with a population of 4.8 million has

tax assessor-collector
A county financial officer whose responsibilities include collecting various county taxes and, in some counties, fees and registering voters.
county treasurer
In many counties, the official who is responsible for receiving, depositing, and disbursing funds.
county auditor
A financial officer whose duties include reviewing county financial records and ensuring that expenditures are made in accordance with the law.
county clerk
The officer who serves as the county's chief record keeper and election officer.
district clerk
The record keeper for the district court in larger counties.
county attorney
A county legal officer whose responsibilities include giving legal advice to the commissioners court, representing the county in civil litigation.
district attorney
The officer who prosecutes most criminal cases.

challenges that are significantly different from those of Loving County, which has only 51 inhabitants. Some reformers argue that voters should be entrusted with restructuring their own county governments to reflect these differences; they argue that counties should be authorized to use home rule provisions similar to those now available to many Texas cities.
The Long Ballot So many county officials are independently elected and the operations of county government are so decentralized that the voters may find it difficult to monitor the many positions involved. Reformers recommend a short ballot-that is, the listing of only a few independently elected offices on an election ballot. They argue that a simplified structure with a single county executive would allow voters to hold one high-profile officer accountable for the administration of county programs. They contend that a chief county executive could coordinate county programs, engage in long-range planning, and eliminate duplication among various county offices.
Defenders of the long ballot counter that the current system provides for the direct election of public officials to ensure that government remains responsive to the needs and demands of the voters, as we discussed in Chapter 3. They fear that concentrating too much power in a single chief executive invites abuse and threatens personal liberty.
Unit Road Systems The unit road system in some counties concentrates the day-to-day
responsibilities for roads in the hands of a professional engineer rather than individual county commissioners. The engineer is responsible to the commissioners court for the efficient and economical construction and maintenance of county roads. The voters may petition for an election to establish the unit road system, or commissioners may initiate the change themselves. Supporters of this system maintain that it brings greater coordination and professionalism to road building and maintenance in rural areas. Commissioners, however, are reluctant to give up the political influence that their individual control over road building brings; some voters like the idea of directly electing the officers who build and maintain their roads.
County Managers County Commissioners in many counties have gone further than simply establishing a unit road system to centralize and professionalize their services. In most of the more populated counties, the commissioners court appoints a county manager or county administrator to supervise and coordinate the various departments that answer to it. The manager has the responsibility for budgeting, planning, purchasing, and hiring for those county depart- ments and serves as a professional advisor to the commissioners court. However, unlike a city manager, the county administrator does not administer the full range of county agencies, but only those under the jurisdiction of the commissioners court. Many county departments continue to be headed by independently elected constitutional officers such as the sheriff, assessor-collector, con- stables, clerks, attorneys, and judges who do not answer to the county manager or commissioners.
Spoils System versus Merit System Elected county officials hire county employees using a spoils system, a system that gives elected officials considerable discretion in employment and promotion decisions. This can make employee job security dependent on the continued election of and allegiance to their employer. Political loyalty rather than competence is often the main factor in the recruitment and retention of employees, and when a new official
is elected, a large turnover of county employees may result.
The spoils system's defenders point out that the elected official is responsible for employees' performance and therefore should have the authority to bring in more employees than just those at the top echelon. They also argue that an elected official would be foolish to release competent employees simply because they had gained their experience under a predecessor. Finally, they argue that alternatives like the merit system provide so much job security that employees become complacent and indifferent to the public.
The spoils system’s opponents propose a merit system that bases employment
and promotion on specific qualifications and performance, as we explained in Chapter 8. Because it would also prohibit termination of employment except for proven cause, the merit system offers job security, which should attract more qualified personnel. Supporters of the merit system maintain that it encourages professionalism, increases efficiency, and allows uniform application of equal opportunity requirements. Texas counties with a population over 190,000 may establish a civil ser-vice program for some county employees, and counties with populations of more than 500,000 may establish a civil service system for the sheriff’s office. According to the Texas Association of Counties, half of the counties that may establish a civil service system have done so, and all but two of the counties eligible to establish a civil service program in the sheriffs’ depart-ment have one.
Consolidation The merging of county government with other local governments to form a single government is called consolidation. Some critics argue that small counties may have been necessary in the nineteenth century, but that in a modern era of rapid communication and transportation they should be merged into more efficient larger governmental units. Other reform-ers point to city–county consolidation as a means of reducing the number of local governments, eliminating duplication of government services, and increasing government efficiency. However, the consolidation of local governments faces many obstacles.
★ SRQ What are the advantages and disadvantages of commissioners, judges, and other major officials such as the sheriff running for office on party labels? Evaluate the use of a long ballot in terms of local government efficiency and responsiveness to public needs.
consolidation The merging of county
government with other local governments to form a single local government.
Consolidation requires legislative action, followed by local voter approval. Independently elected officials at the local level are likely to resist a move that would eliminate their offices and the power that goes with them. Although many cities and counties enter into partnership agreements to provide joint services, city–county consolidation bills have failed to win passage in the Texas Legislature.
Special District Governments
LO 11.3 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of special district governments.
Special districts are local governments that provide single or closely related services that are not provided by general purpose county or municipal gov-ernments. We focus on the nonschool special districts in this chapter, and in Chapter 12 we discuss special purpose governments related to education, such as school districts and community college districts.
These special districts do not always receive attention comparable with cities and coun-ties, but they are no less important when it comes to serving the needs of the public. In a suburban area outside the city limits, for example, a special district may be established to provide water and sewer facilities for a housing development; such a special district has the authority to borrow to build the system and may assess taxes and user fees on property owners and residents. Table 11.4 shows that the number of special districts has grown considerably. In fact,
special districts are the most numerous of all local governments in Texas. Some examples are airport authorities, drainage districts, hospital authorities, municipal utility districts, library districts, navigation districts, metropolitan transit authorities, river authorities, and rural fire
Copyright 2024 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
evention districts; Texas even has noxious weed and mosquito control districts. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, two-thirds of the special districts in Texas provide a single ser-vice. The rest are classified as “multiple-function districts,” and most of those provide closely related functions like sewerage and water supply. Multimember boards usually govern special districts. Voters elect members of some special
district boards either in partisan or nonpartisan elections; city councils and county commissioners appoint others; in some cases, city council members or county commissioners themselves serve ex officio as board members. Special districts should not be confused with dependent agencies. A dependent agency
is a classification created by the U.S. Census Bureau for governmental entities that are closely tied to general purpose governments but do not have as much independence as special district governments. An example of a dependent agency is a crime control and prevention district, a tem-porary agency created with voter approval. Crime con-trol districts have become increasingly popular since the 1990s, particularly in cities located in Tarrant County. Voters have authorized more than 60 crime control districts, and most of them collect either a one-half cent or one-fourth cent sales tax. In some com-munities,
the establishment of crime control and
prevention districts has substantially increased funding for law enforcement.
Reasons for Creating Special District Governments Having a service provided by a special district rather than a general purpose government is appealing for a variety of reasons. A city or county may have limited revenue because of a downturn in the economy, the loss of a major industry, new unfunded mandates, or fewer federal dollars. The general purpose government may have reached its state-mandated sales tax ceiling of 2 percent. Popular or political sentiment may be that city and county property taxes are already too high, and a strong anti-tax organization in the community may

eager to make that point. Little or no support may exist for increasing taxes or cutting other services to accommodate another service responsibility, so special districts may be created to avoid raising city or county taxes. Furthermore, only a small area within a city or county may need the service. Why tax
the entire jurisdiction? A district may be created for the benefit of “underserved areas,” as is the case with library districts in Texas that serve rural and suburban areas. On the other hand, the demand for a service may extend beyond a single jurisdiction, calling for a special district that is multicity or multicounty in scope. For example, a river authority with the power to govern the use of water throughout the river’s watershed must transcend exist-ing political boundaries; flood control districts similarly deal with a problem that crosses political boundaries. Municipal utility districts (MUDs) are often created at the insistence of developers who want to provide water and sewerage for the subdivisions they establish outside city service areas (see Image 11.6). For a host of reasons, special districts serve as alternatives to general purpose governments, and they are an attractive option as an alterna-tive revenue source.
Special Districts: Issues, Trends, and Controversies Although special districts provide valuable public services not provided by general pur-pose governments, reformers charge that they are often too small to be efficient, too low-profile to be visible to the public, and too numerous to be readily held accountable to voters.
Image 11.6 In this March 6, 2016 edition of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, Oliver mockingly highlighted a case in which a developer (via a contractor) hired two people to live temporarily in a trailer on a property in Montgomery County, Texas, where they were the only two people eligible to vote in an election (the notice of which is displayed in the upper left of this screen shot) that created a special district eligible to issue $500 million dollars in bonds.
Multiplicity of Governments and Lack of Visibility Although special districts can be dissolved when a municipality annexes the area and provides it with services, the trend in Texas as across the rest of the nation has been toward the proliferation of special district govern-ments. The sheer number of special district governments and their small size create serious challenges for special district governments. Special districts are sometimes called hidden governments
because the actions of district officials and employees are less visible than if a county or city provided the services. When special district elections are held at times or places other than those for general elections, voter turnout is quite low.
★ SRQ How do municipal utility districts and other special district governments serve narrow special interests in Texas?
Cost and Inefficiency Table 11.5 shows the revenues sources for some of the most common types of special dis-tricts. Many of them have the power to tax property or use general sales taxes. Others depend on user fees or grants. No matter their revenue sources, it is important to consider their efficiency and cost to the public. Because special districts are often small, they may purchase
in limited quantities at higher prices than larger governments. In addition, if special districts have little or no authority to tax, they are forced to borrow money by issuing revenue bonds, which are paid from fees collected for the service provide
her than general obligation bonds, which are paid from tax revenue. Because revenue bonds are less secure than general obligation bonds, special district residents are forced to pay higher interest rates just to service the bonded indebtedness. Special districts may also have a lower bond rating than larger, general purpose governments, which also increases their borrowing costs. A study of special district governments in more than 300 U.S. metropolitan areas con-cluded that the special district approach to governing is more costly than the general purpose approach. Moreover, social welfare functions (such as hospitals, housing, and welfare) tend to receive more revenue in metropolitan areas with fewer special districts. Housekeeping func-tions (including fire protection, natural resources, and police protection) and development functions (including airports, water, and highways) tend to receive more revenue in areas where special districts are more prevalent.12 As an alternative to inefficient special districts, reformers advocate consolidation of small
special districts. To deal with problems and fiscal challenges that transcend city and county boundaries, they urge general purpose governments to negotiate interlocal agreements to meet the needs of their respective communities. They argue that the need for special districts can be reduced by transferring their functions to general purpose government
Councils of Governments
LO 11.4
Evaluate the role of councils of governments as local government partners.
The multitude of local governments with different jurisdictions and missions can pose chal- lenges when services are of a regional nature. These governments look for ways to coordinate activities and share information without compromising their respective legal responsibilities.
Councils of Governments
Advisory bodies consisting of representatives of various local governments brought together for the purposes of regional planning and cooperation are called councils of governments (COGS). COGs are not governments; instead, they are voluntary regional groupings of local governments to provide a forum to share information and coordinate public policy. Local governments are involved in the delivery of a variety of services that are the product of national, state, and local laws and policies, and many of the public needs and problems transcend gov ernmental jurisdictions. Intergovernmental communication is essential to successful collabora- tion and delivery of regional services.
The Texas Association of Regional Councils consists of all COGs in the state. The associa- tion lists a wide range of services provided by Texas COGs, including:
• Planning and implementing regional homeland security strategies
Operating law enforcement training academies
Promoting regional municipal solid waste and environmental quality planning
Providing cooperative purchasing options for governments
Managing region-wide services to the elderly
• Maintaining and improving regional 9-1-1 systems
Promoting regional economic development
Operating specialized transit systems
Providing management services for member governments
Applying What You Have Learned about Local Government
LO 11.5 Apply what you have learned about local government.
You learned that Texas county judges share power in county government with several other elected officeholders, but they are probably the most powerful of county officials. They serve as the chief spokesperson for county government and play a central role during times of pandemic and natural disaster. In the wake of a series of unprecedented disasters that Texas has recently endured, we asked KP George to put a face on the office of county judge and to give you his first-hand personal views about what it is like to serve in this high-profile position.
First elected in 2018 and reelected in 2022, Judge George serves as the county judge of Fort Bend County, Texas's 10th most populous county and its most diverse. Judge George was born in a small village in the southern Indian state of Kerala and immigrated to the United States in 1993. He is a board-certified financial planner, and co-owned and operated a successful financial practice. In 2014 Judge George was elected to the Fort Bend ISD School Board where he served two terms before becoming County Judge.

Politics in Practice
Being County Judge
by KP George County Judge, Fort Bend County
There is no greater honor in life than serving others, and what an honor it has been for me to serve as one of the 254 county judges in Texas. I am humbled by the opportunity to help shape the lives of the almost 1 million residents of Fort Bend County. While I enjoy fulfilling my constitutional duties, ensuring your voice is heard is key to making our county government more effective, engaging, and efficient. We are one of the most diverse counties in the United States and a model for the future, which is why we always lead by example. The voters, from all walks of life that call Fort Bend home, gave me the chance to serve as the county judge of Fort Bend to better the lives of our families and generations to come.
The role of the county judge is more than just executing administrative functions and presiding over a weekly commissioners court. Although those roles are critical functions in local government I must always stay in touch and learn from our community to understand their evolving needs and act accordingly. There is simply nothing more rewarding in public service than meeting the needs of our residents. It's about being there for our neighbors in times of jubilation and in times of despair. Together with highly trained professionals, we run the Emergency Medical Services, coordinate the response to all natural disasters from pandemics to floods, and work with first responders during times of crisis. To be a county judge is to be there for our community around the clock, whether it is in my office or out in the county with you.
Fort Bend County is among the fastest growing counties in the nation, with a population of over 850,000 residents. Our rapid growth requires us to plan strategically to ensure that our infrastructure continues to meet our diverse and growing needs, even decades down the road. If we aren't listening or actively working to improve the day-to-day lives of our residents, we aren't doing our job. In my role, I work to discover the needs of our neighbors by going to where they are in every part of our county. In so doing, I am able to understand core needs from drainage to roads to lighting to transportation. All are important and the insight is only gained through direct, meaningful engagement with one another.
My father was a truck driver who only made a few dollars a day. But he told us that if we wanted to break the cycle of poverty, education and hard work were the only way. In that vision, my mom and dad sent eight of us to school and instilled in us a strong work ethic. Because of those two factors, I was able to pursue the American dream, run my own business, serve as a two-term board member of the Fort Bend Independent School District, and now as County Judge of Fort Bend County. These life obstacles and challenges have prepared me to take on herculean struggles from responding to a historic pandemic to coordinating the recovery after an unthinkable winter storm and subsequent failure of the statewide electric grid. Like many of you, the pipes in my home burst causing extensive damage and headaches. But also like you, I have found the strength to overcome the damage of Hurricane Harvey, Winter Storm Uri, and any other challenge put in our way. There is nothing we cannot do if
we do it together.
My message to those reading this, especially our young people, is simple: With hard work, education, and gratitude for all those that help you along the way – you can accomplish anything. My goal is to work with everyone I can to ensure Fort Bend County continues to be the top place for all to live, work, and truly thrive. If you’re not from Fort Bend County, I encourage you to drop by and see what we have to offer. The people are friendly, the food is world class, our schools are top-notch, and our communities are beautiful. This is the place where everyone can find a place where they belong.
Questions for Critical Thinking 1. In addition to serving as the most powerful county executive, in what ways does the county judge serve as a spokesperson for the county? Would you conclude that KP George is an articulate advocate for his county?
2. What is the role of the county judge in time of crisis? How would command of public and media attention give the county judge power to rally county agencies and the residents to deal with shared challenge
Chapter Summary
LO 11.1 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of municipal governments. Municipalities with a population greater than 5,000 may adopt home rule, which allows them to write their own charters and pans ordinances subject to the limits of state law. Cities that do not meet that population requirement must operate under a general law charter established by the atte
The nonpartisan election is a key feature of Texas municipal government, and the council-manager form of government and at-large elections are also characteristics of many Texas cities. Some cities with large Latino and African American populations have, under court order, replaced at-large elections with single-member districts, modified election aystems, or instituted cumulative voting Local voters may also influence their communities through initiative, referendum, and recall elections, rollback elections: term-limit elections, and economic development sales tax elections Municipalities may expand into unincorporated areas, but state laws now give residents the right to vote on annexation plans and require municipal services be provided in a timely manner.
LO 11.2 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of county governments. The structure and organization of county government are determined by the Texas Constitution and the state legislature. Texas counties range considerably in terms of population, yet they are unable to adopt home rule and special state laws must be passed to authorize them to alter their structures or adapt to changing local needs. County governments have a plural
executive system with many county departments being independently elected, including department heads such as law enforcement officers, financial officers, and clerical officers.
LO 11.3 Describe and evaluate the organization and structure of special district governments. Special district governments provide single or closely related services that are not provided by general purpose county or municipal governments. Special districts are the most numerous of all local governments in Texas, and they have steadily increased in number since the mid-twentieth century. The types of services they provide, how their governing boards are selected, and their sources of revenue vary.
Having a service provided by a special district rather than a
general purpose government is appealing to many residents for
a variety of reasons, including the lack of support among general
purpose governments for increasing taxes or cutting other
services to accommodate another service responsibility. Critica
charge that they are often too small to be efficient, too low-profile
to be visible to the public, and too numerous to be readily held
accountable to voters.
LO 11.4 Evaluate the role of councils of governments as local government partners. Government is largely fragmented at the local level. Although friction between governments is common, cooperation may also result when local governments agree to share responsibility for certain services Nevertheless, any significant changes in the structural relationship between cities, counties, and special districts
ill likely continue to be more incremental than sweeping. But on a routine basis, local governments can cooperate with the assistance of councils of governments, voluntary regional groupings of local governments that share information and coordinate government plannin
O 11.5 Apply what you have learned about local government. KP George gave you a personal, inside view of what it is like to serve as county judge in a populous and diverse Texas county during pandemic and natural disaster. You learned how this high-profile office can be used to rally the community in difficult times.






