
s you have learned, there are substantial differences between criminal and civil law. Civil law deals largely with private rights and individual relationships, obligations, and responsibilities. Criminal law is concerned with public morality-concepts of right and wrong as defined by government.
Hence, criminal cases are prosecuted by public officials (usually county or district attor- neys) in the name of the public. Civil suits are brought by a plaintiff, who is usually a private person or institution, although governments occasionally initiate civil suits when seeking to enforce antitrust laws, abate public nuisances, or pursue other noncriminal matters.
Perhaps the most important distinction between civil and criminal law is the way each deals with court findings. In criminal law the aim is punishment, but in civil law the remedy used to redress an injury is relief from ongoing injury or compensation for past damages. For example, criminal law might punish a thief, but the civil law remedy for the unlawful seizure of property might be the return of the property to its rightful owner. Regarded as civil rather than criminal, juvenile proceedings are an interesting illustration of the difference between civil and criminal law. Assigning juveniles to the custody of reform schools is not intended as punishment but as an effort to correct their delinquency. Assigning an adult to a penitentiary, however, is considered punishment.
Civil Law
LO 10.1 Analyze civil law and the policy issues related to it.
The primary focus of civil law is defining and civilizing interpersonal relationships; it also enforces legitimate contracts between parties and assigns responsibilities for personal inju- ries. We provide a sample of some civil laws, but you should remember that Texas civil law fills volumes of printed matter. Texas civil statutes are organized into twenty-eight codes ranging from the Agriculture Code to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. It is impossible to discuss the state's civil laws in detail-even the most competent attorneys tend to specialize in specific fields of law.
Types of Civil Law
Civil law in the states today is based in large part on centuries-old English common law we first discussed in Chapter 3. Common law is judge-made law; whether written or unwritten, it is based on precedents, previously decided cases used as a guiding principle for future cases. If the essential elements of a current case are like those of a case already decided, the judge makes the same decision as was made in the earlier case. These decisions made over the years have fallen into patterns that form the basis of common law. In contrast, statutory law is law that has been passed by legislative bodies and is written in codebooks. Legislatures have incor- porated many common-law principles into civil statutes and thereby reduced the need to rely directly on common law.
Family Law The family is protected by civil law in Texas. For example, even if a man and
a woman have not participated in a formal ceremony of marriage in the presence of authorized
officers of religious organizations or judges, the law may nevertheless recognize the existence
of a marriage. A man and a woman who live together, agree they are married, and publicly present themselves as husband and wife will have a common-law marriage, their children will be legitimate, and the marriage can be terminated through a legal divorce. However, divorce action must be taken within one year of separation, or the marriage will be treated as if it never existed.
As a community property state, Texas requires that a divorced couple divide property acquired during marriage, and one spouse is not usually responsible for the other's support.

Children, however, have the right to be supported by their parents even if the parents are divorced. Either parent might be given legal custody of the children, but the other parent may be responsible for part of their support.
Real Estate Law Titles to real property, such as land and buildings, are registered in the office of the county clerk, and the legitimate use of any property by its owner is enforce-able in the courts. The owner of a homestead will not lose it in a civil suit except to satisfy tax liens, home improvement loans, mortgage loans for initial purchase of the property, or home equity loans.
Probate Law Even in death, property rights are protected because a person may control transfer of his or her estate through a will. If a will exists at the time of death, the function of the courts (usually the county courts) is to probate the will, determining that it is the last and valid will of the deceased. If a person dies without leaving a will, civil law defines the right to inherit among various relatives; if there are no living relatives, the property passes to the state. The right to inherit, bequeath, sell, lease, or transfer property is protected by law, but the
rights of ownership do not include the privilege of misuse. The right to own a gun does not convey the right to use it as a weapon in murder; the privilege of opening an industrial plant does not include the right to pollute. The regulation of private property for public purposes is one of the oldest functions of law.
Business Regulations Texas law includes thousands of provisions regulating pri-vate property, and it establishes hundreds of courts and administrative agencies to elaborate, interpret, and enforce those regulations. State regulatory agencies include the Texas Railroad Commission, the Commissioner of Insurance, the Texas Finance Commission, the Public Utilities Commission, and occupational licensing boards. Their administrative regulations are administrative law enforced by civil rather than criminal courts, and the attorney general may also bring civil suits to enforce antitrust and consumer protection laws.
Corporate Law When corporations secure permission from the state to conduct busi-ness, the secretary of state issues them a charter, the organizing document that defines their structure, purposes, and activities. Civil law holds that when a new corporation is chartered, a new legal person is created—one who can sue and be sued. Corporations are frequently sued for breach of contracts and personal injury claims.
Contract Law When two parties enter into a valid contract, the courts will enforce the terms of the contract. However, certain kinds of contracts are not enforceable in the courts—for example, contracts with minors. Texas right-to-work laws also forbid contracts between labor and management that establish a closed shop in which management agrees to hire only labor union members or a union shop in which management agrees to require all new employees to join the union as a condition for their continued employment. Because of these restrictions, Texas is considered inhospitable to unions.
Torts Cases involving a civil wrong that results in a personal injury are called torts. Some-times injuries result from negligence when someone fails to act with the prudence an ordinary person would exercise. For example, victims of reckless driving or medical malpractice may bring a tort action to recover losses. Other examples of personal injury may result from inten-tional acts such as selling defective products or falsely defaming someone’s character. Slander is spoken and libel is published defamation, but either may result in a lawsuit to recover mon-etary compensation for damage to one’s reputation and earning potential.
Issues in Civil Law
These are only a few selected illustrations of civil law. More valuable to the average Texas citizen is an understanding of the major political issues surrounding civil suits. In fact, efforts to change civil law have been a major issue in Texas election campaigns and have occupied much of the legisla- ture's time and energy.

Tort Reform Insurance companies, corporations, medical practitioners, and others have argued that society has become overly litigious—too inclined to go to court to settle differ-ences. They assert that “frivolous” lawsuits have overcrowded court dockets and excessive damage awards have unnecessarily driven up insurance premiums and other business costs. As a result, most Republican leaders have joined with groups representing defendants in civil actions, the Texas Civil Justice League, Texans for Lawsuit Reform, insurance companies, and a wide range of business and medical interest groups to urge tort reform to limit liability in civil cases. Because of the power of this political alliance, Texas has given judges the power to dismiss
frivolous lawsuits and has capped jury awards for punitive damages intended to punish the defendant. And Texans narrowly approved a constitutional amendment to allow the legislature to limit claims for pain and suffering.
Consumer and environmentalist groups, Public
Image 10.1 Texas Department of Insurance data show that medical malpractice suits have declined by two-thirds since tort reform was adopted in Texas.
Citizen, Texas Watch, Texans for Public Justice, the Texas Trial Lawyers Association, and most Demo-cratic Party leaders generally oppose sweeping tort reform of the type Texas has enacted. They argue that isolated anecdotal instances of lawsuit abuse should not be used as a justification to restrict the fundamental right to trial by jury. They contend that only a jury hearing all evidence presented by both sides can make an appropriate judgment in cases of extreme negligence or abuse of an individual’s rights. Plaintiffs’ attorneys view tort reform as a big busi-★ SRQ Should statewide statutes limit malpractice claims, or should juries be allowed to evaluate them on a case-by-case basis?
ness attack on the laws protecting consumers against defective products and deceptive trade practices; they argue that the threat of meaningful civil action is the only way to hold manufacturers and professionals responsible for their actions and to force companies to improve safety procedures. Tort reform makes law-yers reluctant to take the risk of bringing costly and time-consuming lawsuits against well-funded corpo-rations. Under Texas’s “loser pays” system, if either party refuses an out-of-court settlement and if the jury awards damages significantly different from the settlement offer, the loser must pay all of the winner’s legal expenses.
Tort reform issues are often the primary driving force in judicial campaigns. Corporations,
insurance companies, health professionals, and frequently sued business groups generally contribute money to Republican judicial candidates, who are inclined to interpret the law to limit damages in civil lawsuits. Consumer groups, environmentalists, plaintiffs’ lawy


Texans for Lawsuit Reform: Interest Groups and Justice
Dick Trabulsi, the owner of a chain of liquor stores, and Houston homebuilder Richard Weekley organized Texans for Lawsuit Reform (TLR) to support tort reform. Whether or not one agrees with TLR, there is no doubt that the group has used political means to change Texas's concept of justice.
TLR first became a fundraising juggernaut and established itself as a major force in Texas politics with the election of former Governor George W. Bush. Funded principally by around two dozen megadonors, TLR remains one of the largest and most prominent interest groups to help bankroll Republican candidates for the Texas Legislature, the governorship, and the Texas Supreme Court.
Visualizing itself as an opponent of frivolous lawsuits, TLR argued that excessive damage awards in civil cases drive up the costs of doing business and that those costs are passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices. The group persuaded the legislature and voters to amend the Texas Constitution to restrict jury awards of punitive damages, and it successfully advocated for a "loser pays" system for legal fees.
TLR's opponents-including plaintiffs lawyers who represent consumers, injured workers, patients, and the insured-believe that tort reform dramatically altered the rights of injured parties to sue businesses, medical providers, and insurance companies. They believe that tort reform "went far

beyond limiting excessive jury awards and effectively barred the courtroom door to injured Texans with legitimate claims." Mark Kincaid of the Texas Trial Lawyers Association asked, "What else is left for them to do?"
Actually, TLR continues to be one of Texas's largest campaign megadonors endorsing and funding candidates in the spring party primaries and in the fall general elections. TLR-backed candidates win far more often than they lose, though in 2022 it experienced one of its rare defeats when its attempt to oust incumbent attorney general Ken Paxton in the Republican primary failed. The TLR backed Eva Guzman, who in fact finished third, in spite of TLR spending more than $2.5 million in support of her candidacy.
Thinking about the role of elites in Texas politics
The Texas political system tends to over- represent concentrated interests at the expense of diffused interests. Insurance companies, health care providers, manufacturers, and retailers are often sued and have a strong interest in organizing to limit legal actions that raise their cost of doing business. Meanwhile, workers, patients, and consumers have little motivation to organize to protect their right to recover damages on the off chance that they will be injured by lax workplace safety standards, medical malpractice, or defective products.
SRO
Why is it difficult for diffuse interests to organize themselves in order to protect their interests within the political system

patient rights groups, and workers’ organizations usually rally around Democratic judicial candidates, who tend to be friendlier to their causes. Our Texas Insiders feature puts a face on the political battle over tort reform.
Liability Insurance Automobile insurance is one area for tort reform that the Texas legislature has not seriously considered. A no-fault insurance plan would allow an insured person to collect damages from the individual’s own insurance company regardless of who is at fault in an accident. Under Texas’s liability insurance plan, an expensive and time-consumi

legal effort is often required to determine which of the individuals involved in an accident is to blame and thus legally responsible for damages. With no-fault insurance, insurance company costs for court trials could be substantially reduced, and the resulting savings could presumably be passed on to policy holders. Although some instances of fraud have been asso- ciated with no-fault insurance, at least a dozen states have successfully used limited no-fault insurance programs.
Eminent Domain The Texas Constitution, like the U.S. Constitution, requires that owners must be given adequate or just compensation in cases of eminent domain, when government takes their private property for public use. "Just compensation" has long been interpreted to mean fair market value. Recently, however, the meaning of "public use" has become controversial. The U.S. Supreme Court interpreted public use to include private com- mercial development as long as it benefits the community as a whole.' In its ruling, the Court approved a city government seizing private residences to make way for a resort hotel, office buildings, and luxury apartments.
Although this is the interpretation of "use" that was used in Texas and many other states, property rights advocates were outraged. They hoped that the Court would ban taking, or con- demning, private property for the benefit of other investors. Property rights activists argued that wealthy, politically well-connected buyers have the power to profit by influencing govern- ment to displace homeowners from property to use it for their own purposes.
In response, Texas limited government's power of eminent domain. The legislature banned state and local governments from condemning private property for economic development projects except roads, parks, libraries, auditoriums, ports, and utilities. Local governments may still use eminent domain for flood control and urban renewal projects.
The Elements of Crime
LO 10.2 Analyze the elements of crime.
Although presidential candidates often make crime a national issue, only 5 percent of crimes are actually prosecuted under federal law. Criminal justice policies are made primarily by states, not the federal government.
An act of Congress provides that federal offenses include crimes (1) committed on the high seas; (2) committed on federal property, territories, and reservations; (3) involving the crossing of state or national boundaries; (4) interfering with interstate commerce; or (5) committed against the national government or its employees while they are engaged in official duties. Otherwise, the vast majority of crimes are violations of state rather than federal law.
Types of Crime
A crime is an act that violates whatever a legislature defines as penal law. Many obey the law simply because it is law; others obey out of fear of punishment. Nevertheless, it is people's basic attitudes and values that are most important in determining whether they will respect or disobey a law. If a law reflects the values of most of society, as the law against murder does, it is usually obeyed. However, if a large element of society does not accept the values protected by law such as alcohol prohibition in the 1920s or marijuana prohibition today-violation becomes widespread.
Felonies Serious crimes punishable by state institutions are felonies such as those shown
in Table 10.1. Murder is the illegal, willful killing of another human being. Robbery is
attempting to take something from a person by force or threat of force. It is inaccurate to say

hat “a house was robbed”—this implies that a masked bandit stood at the front door with a pistol drawn on the doorbell and demanded that the building deliver up all its valuables. Buildings are burglarized—unlawfully entered to commit a felony or theft. Theft (larceny) is simply taking property from the rightful possession of another. Grand
larceny—taking something valued more than $2,500—is a felony. Regardless of value, live-stock rustling is a felony. It is also a felony for an adult to have sexual relations with a child less than 17 years of age.
Misdemeanors In Texas, it is a crime for someone to disturb game hunters or for a commercial fisherman to possess a flounder less than 15 inches in length. Texting while driv-ing is now outlawed. Most traffic violations are crimes, and the resulting fine is a form of punishment. Such minor crimes are called misdemeanors and are punishable by a sentence in county jail or a fine.
Victimless Crimes Whether felonies or misdemeanors, some criminologists consider such crimes as prostitution, gambling, and illegal drug possession to be victimless crimes because their primary victims are the criminals themselves. As a result, some reformers hav

argued that these activities should not be penalized and individuals should be allowed to make personal choices as to the risks and consequences of their decisions. They argue that the cost of criminalizing these activities outweighs any benefits from prohibition; prohibition gives rise to orga-nized crime and incarceration imposes heavy costs on the criminal justice system. Instead, they contend that society should legalize and regulate these activities and focus on harm reduction, treatment, and rehabilitation in cases of addiction.
Others argue that families and society at large suffer from drug and gambling addictions,
that sex work can be unsafe and unhealthy, and that these activities are linked to more serious crime. They fear that legalizing drugs and prostitution will make them more readily available, leading to large-scale commercialization and widespread potential threat to the public health.
Factors in Arrest
Persons who commit crimes represent the broad spectrum of human personality and come from virtually any of the multitudes of social and economic classes. Persons who commit crimes, by definition, for one reason or another, are unwilling to implement the social values legislators have written into the law. Beyond that statement, it is impossible to evaluate the actual causes of crime which are a combination of systemic problems and a multitude of individual personal motivations. However, it is useful to look at the demographics and other factors that correlate with arrests and, hence, encounters with the criminal justice system

Age Persons between the ages of 20 and 39 account for a disproportionate share of crime in Texas. In 2020, they accounted for 60 percent of all arrests for aggravated assault, 52 percent for robbery, and 67 percent for murder. Nationwide, Americans in this age group accounted for the largest share of all arrests nationwide for both violent crimes (murder, non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, aggravated assault, and robbery) and property crimes (burglary, theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson). Most of these make up FBI index crimes, which are used as a national barometer of the crime rate-murder and non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, grand theft, and motor vehicle theft.
Gender The single best predictor of arrests is sex. In 2020, adult males accounted for 85 percent of Texans arrested for murder or manslaughter, 73 percent for robbery, 72 percent for aggravated assault, 82 percent for rape, 75 percent for burglary, and 58 percent for theft. The single classification of crime for which women are disproportionately arrested is prostitu- tion, but even for this offense, males still account for 35 percent of arrests.
Ethnicity and Race Certain members of minority groups are arrested dispropor- tionately for crime, Although only 13 percent of Texas's population is African American, in 2020, 49 percent of those arrested for robbery, 45 percent of murder arrests, and 36 percent of arrests for aggravated assault were African American. Meanwhile, 40 percent of Texans were Latinos, but they did not account for a disproportionate share of arrests-30 percent of arrests for murder, 34 percent for robbery, and 35 percent for aggravated assault. It is not known how much the higher arrest rates in African-American communities is the result of selective enforcement and profiling of individual African Americans (see Image 10.2), but arrests in their communities is disproportionate to their population.

Did You Know? Oregon passed a 2020 referendum to decriminalize possession of so-called hard drugs (heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine, and oxycodone) in small amounts, although manufacturing and sales will still be illegal. The state will use the money not spent on drug enforcement to fund addiction and recovery p


Income and Education Poverty is among the social injustices experienced disproportionately by ethnic and racial minorities, but it is by no means unique to them. Limited edu-cation and substantial psychological problems are also a result of poverty. People in poverty, regardless of racial or ethnic back-ground, are more likely to be arrested than members of the middle and upper classes.
Urban Life Crime is more likely in large metropolitan areas. More than three-fourths of all Texans live in densely populated metropolitan areas of more than 50,000 people (called metropolitan statistical areas). The character of urban life may contribute to crime in that larger cities are more anonymous, and social sanctions seem less effective than in rural areas and small towns, as sociologists have extensively documented. Not only is there greater freedom in the city to act criminally, but there are also gangs and other organizations that openly encourage criminal activity. A majority of inmates in Texas prisons are from the Dallas–Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio areas.
Recidivism For those who are arrested and convicted, the Texas criminal justice system fails to rehabilitate. As a result, Texas has a high rate of recidivism, the tendency of criminals to relapse into crime. The Texas Legislative Budget Board reported that, among
those released from state prison in 2017, 48 percent had been rearrested within three years. Among those who had been released under felony community supervision, 41 percent had been rearrested and the three-year rearrest rate for state jails was an astounding 63 percent. The rearrest rates for juvenile institutions was even higher, with 76 percent of those released from state and local juvenile residential facilities being rear-rested within three years.6
We evaluate correctional institu-tions and criminal justice policies more extensively later in this chapter.
Substance Use Disorders Use of illicit drugs contributes to crime in a variety of ways. In 2020, only 88,651 Texans were arrested for drug abuse violations7
; however, reports
from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) surveys have indicated that about a quarter of property crimes were committed to finance drug habits. Narcotics as well as alcohol also reduce inhibitions, and BJS victim surveys have indicated that about 26 percent of victims of violent crime reported that their assailants were under the influence.8
Access to Weapons Access to effective weapons is a factor in violent crime. Few weapons are as efficient and readily available as firearms, which are used in more than 81 percent of all murders and a majority of all robberies in Texas.9
These facts, together with
intense media attention to high-profile shootings (see Image 10.3), generate passionate debate about public policy toward gun

Bland recorded this cell phone video of state trooper Brian Encinia as she was being arrested for switching lanes without a signal, a crime usually enforced at the discretion of law enforcement agents. The situation escalated and then Bland was jailed without adequate supervision for a prisoner known to have had a previous suicide attempt. After her death by suicide in the Waller County jail, Bland’s video set off protests against selective enforcement and discriminatory treatment. The publicity resulted in the Sandra Bland Act (2017), which sets standards for treatment of mentally ill inmates in custody. See Bland’s cell phone video at https://www.youtube.com/shorts/ hevRqm40RvM and the trooper’s dash cam video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v= CaW09Ymr2BA

Gun safety advocates argue that access to guns in the
home poses a health risk when people act on violent or sui-cidal impulses and have effective weapons at their disposal. People living in homes with guns are 2.7 times more likely to die from homicide10
suicide than those in homes without guns.11
and 4.8 times more likely to die from Furthermore,
firearms stolen from gunowners are a source of weapons for criminals.12
Rarely are firearms used to successfully prevent
crime; civilians killed only thirty-two felons in justifiable homicides in Texas during 2020.13 Defenders of gun owner rights argue that a majority of
Americans believe that having a gun in the home makes it a safer place14
and that proposed gun regulations, such as back-ground checks or limits on types of guns and ammunition, would have only a marginal effect, if any, on gun violence. Opponents of gun regulations hold that owning or carry-ing a gun is a constitutional right15 against intrusion by government.
that deserves protection
★ PRQ Do background checks of gun buyers violate Texans’ right to keep and bear arms? After personal reflection, explain the trade-off between personal freedom and public good.
White-Collar Crime In contrast to street criminals, few people think of a successful businessperson or a lawyer as being a criminal, yet these people may stretch the mean-ing and intent of federal income tax laws, keep fraudulent business accounts, and pollute the environment. Crimes such as bribery, tax fraud, business fraud, price-fixing, and embezzlement are white-collar crimes, usually committed by more prosperous people who have often benefited from the very best advantages that society has to offer. The arrest rate
for such crimes is much lower than for other property crimes, and yet they cost the nation at least 30 times as much, at least $500 billion per year.16
Victims of Crime
Although more affluent areas of the state and nation are sometimes victimized by perpe-trators of street crime, police reports demonstrate that the greatest rates of victimization are in the less affluent sections of our cities. Crime is largely a neighborhood affair and is often committed against friends and families of the criminal. Acquaintance rape, or date rape, has been well publicized, and at least 39 percent of Texas killers were acquainted with their victims. In fact, 12 percent of all murder victims were killed by members of their own family.17 Victims have the right to be informed of investigations and court proceedings against
the accused and to have their victim impact statements taken into account during sentenc-ing and parole action. The Texas Crime Victims’ Compensation Fund is administered by the attorney general and financed by small fees collected from criminals when they are convicted. These meager funds are available to victims with extreme personal hardships resulting from physical injury during a crime. However, most victims are not eligible; for example, the fund does not provide compensation for the billions of dollars of property stolen each year. The long-term trend in crime rates has actually been downward—Texas’s crime rate has been cut in half since 199018; property crime rates have dropped dramatically
mage 10.3 The gunman in the deadliest school shooting in Texas history legally bought two AR-style rifles just after his eighteenth birthday, just days before his 2022 assault on Robb Elementary School in Uvalde in which he killed nineteen students and two teachers. Widespread news coverage of the event and its aftermath led the national government to pass gun regulations to require more intense scrutiny before buyers between 18 and 21 years of age are allowed to buy rif

Figure 10.1 Rate of Violent Crime in Texas and the United States This figure shows that the violent crime rate has recently increased both in Texas and nationwide. The index violent crime rate per 100,000 residents (for homicide, robbery, rape, and aggravated assault) is considerably higher in Texas than it is for the nation as a

ince their peak. In the last few years, however, violent crime has risen somewhat as Figure 10.1 shows. Violence-centered local news coverage attracts large audiences, and national reports of school shootings and gun crime have contributed to widespread fear of becoming a victim of crime. This fear has been used to promote several agendas, with some advocating increased funding for law enforcement and others supporting stricter gun-control policies.
The Due Process of Law LO 10.3 Analyze the concepts of due process.
It is in the courts that the most general concept of justice and the broadest norms of society are enforced against specific individuals. The courts must blend two conflicting goals of society: (1) to protect society according to the state’s legal concepts of right and wrong and (2) to protect the rights of the individual charged with wrongdoing. Following proper procedures is designed to promote justice and protect the individual from
the government, and together they constitute what is called due process. The Texas Constitu-tion and the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution require that the state respect these procedural rights. Due process is essential to guaranteeing fairness before the govern-ment may deprive a person of life, liberty, or property. Figure 10.2 takes a suspect step by step from search through trial and shows the consti-tutional guarantees that a person should be able to expect as part of the due process of law. However, these rights guaranteed to the accused are very nearly meaningless unless courts, prosecutors, and law enforcement agents are careful to protect them—in practice, due process depends on the values of those who administer and interpret the l
Figure 10.2 Steps in Criminal Justice and Due Process Guarantees This figure shows the major steps in criminal justice, from search to trial, along with the basic constitutional rights to due process that should be guaranteed at ea

The Search
At certain crucial points in the investigation and apprehension of suspected criminals, society has for centuries demanded various external checks and limits on law enforcement agencies to protect the innocent and the presumption of innocence. For example, the Texas Constitution and the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibit “unreasonable” searche

Probable Cause For the most part, the reasonableness of a search is determined by supposedly neutral and independent courts, which supervise the law enforcement agencies that propose to intrude on private premises in search of evidence. In Texas, justices of the peace, municipal court judges, or other magistrates appointed by district courts usually determine probable cause-whether the facts and circumstances are sufficient to lead a "reasonable person" to believe that evidence is probably contained on the premises and thus a warrant for the invasion of privacy is justified.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states must respect an exclusionary rule, under which evidence resulting from unreasonable searches could not be admitted in court." Excluding wrongly obtained evidence discourages law enforcement agents from engaging in illegal invasions of privacy because the evidence obtained may not be used against the accused.
The constitution does not always strictly require warrants or probable cause as long as the search is reasonable. For example, motor vehicles may be searched with probable cause but warrants are not required because it is simply impractical to obtain them when evidence may be driven away. Reasonable suspicion, which is less than probable cause, is sufficient to stop and frisk a pedestrian in order to protect the public safety, and search of a prisoner is reason- able to protect law enforcement agents. Critics argue, however, that stop-and-frisk searches have sometimes been arbitrary and discriminatory in practice.
The Arrest
Like privacy, an individual's liberty is a particularly valued right. The mere fact that a person has been arrested may damage his or her reputation in the community. In short, arrest is in itself a form of punishment. To prevent arrests for frivolous causes, the courts may issue warrants authorizing police to arrest suspects. In Texas, magistrates issue a war- rant to take a person into custody when they are presented with probable cause that the person has committed a crime, when a prosecutor files for a writ of information to charge a person for a misdemeanor, or when a grand jury issues an indictment to charge a person with a felony.
Police officers may make arrests without a warrant when they have probable cause and when circumstances do not permit their obtaining one. They may make arrests for crimes they witness or those that are reported directly to them by a witness. Although an arrest resulting from investigation is technically illegal without a warrant, police have considerable flexibility.
The time between a person's arrest and appearance before a magistrate is critical. Histori- cally, this period was a time of much police abuse, during which law enforcement officers sometimes used physical violence or "third-degree" psychological tactics. Police would also delay taking a suspect before a magistrate because probable cause for arrest would have to be shown and the suspect would have to be informed of certain constitutional rights. As a result, law enforcement agents were able to extract confessions or other evidence from frightened and sometimes abused suspects.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that confessions obtained in this manner are unreliable and violate the guarantees against forced self-incrimination in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amend- ments to the U.S. Constitution. In Miranda v. Arizona, the Court ruled that for a confession resulting from an interrogation to be valid, the prisoner would need to be reminded of certain
rights in what came to be known as the Miranda warning:
1. The suspect has the right to remain silent.
2. Any statement made may be used against the suspect.
3. The suspect has the right to an attorney, whether or not he or she can afford one.

probable cause
Sufficient information to lead a "reasonable person" to believe that evidence is probably contained on the premises and thus a warrant for the invasion of privacy is justified.
exclusionary rule
Evidence resulting from unreasonable searches may not be admitted in court.

isoners are usually given this warning at the time of arrest to ensure that possible confes-sions will be admissible, even though some types of confessions are valid even if the warning was not given.
arraignment
A prisoner’s initial appearance before a magistrate in which the charges and basic rights are explained.
The Arraignment After arrest, the suspect is jailed while reports are completed and the district attorney’s office decides whether to file charges and what bail to recommend. As soon as is practical, the pris-oner makes an initial appearance before a magistrate or justice of the peace in which the charges and basic rights are explained. This appearance is called the initial arraignment, and its purpose is to: 1. Explain the charges against the accused. 2. Remind the suspect of the rights to remain silent and to be represented by counsel and to request a written acknowledgment that the Miranda warning was given and understood.
3. Set bail. 4. Inform the accused of the right to an examining tria

The Right to an Attorney The right to counsel is vital to the accused—an attorney should clearly understand the constitutional rights of the accused and be familiar with the intricacies of the law and the courts. So important is the assis-tance of counsel that many suspects will contact an attorney even before they first appear in front of a magistrate. Yet this right to counsel has never been absolute. Histori-meanor cases when the defendant could not afford one.21
cally, the right to counsel was interpreted to mean that the accused had a right to an attorney if he or she could afford one. In a series of cases, the courts later extended this right to a court-appointed attorney in felony and serious misde-Even today, however, the right to
court-appointed counsel does not necessarily guarantee equal justice for the poor. Some Texas counties still rely on an assigned counsel system in which private lawyers are
selected and paid on a case-by-case basis or in which they work by contract to defend a group of indigent cases assigned to them. Paid by the county, some attorneys find that time spent defending poor people does not significantly advance either their practice or their income. Other attorneys have developed highly successful practices based on indigent defense, and some judges have been charged with cronyism for assigning cases to lawyers who have con-tributed to their political campaigns. A number of Texas counties have established a system of salaried, full-time public
defenders to serve as advocates for indigents in serious criminal cases. Supporters of a public defender system have argued that it is more professional and less costly than the assigned counsel system. Despite the reforms adopted in some counties, the quality of indigent rep-resentation varies tremendously from county to county and from defendant to defenda

Setting Bail The security deposit required for the release of a suspect awaiting trial is known as bail. Some persons released on bail fail to appear in court, and their security deposit is forfeited. Others commit still more crimes while out on bail. However, the legal system presumes that an individual is innocent unless convicted, and bail supports this assumption by permitting the accused to resume a normal professional and social life while preparing a defense.
Although bail may be reset or denied following indictment, the Texas Constitution guarantees the right to bail immediately after arrest, except where proof is "evident" in capital cases or when the defendant is being charged with a third felony after two previ- ous felony convictions. The state constitution allows bail to be denied if the defendant is charged with committing a felony while released on bail or under indictment for another felony.
In practice, the right to bail exists only for those who can afford it. Private, licensed bond- ing companies may be willing to post bond for a fee (usually 10 percent of the bail amount set by the court), which, unlike bail, is not refunded. Many defendants cannot afford even this fee, and unless released on personal recognizance (the defendant's personal promise to appear). the prisoner will await trial in jail.
Bail was designed to free a person not yet found guilty of a crime, but some innocent people await trial in jail, unable to work, carry on their family life, or gather evidence for their own defense. In our criminal justice system, bail procedures, more than any other single practice, punish the poor for their poverty-most of Texas's jail inmates have not yet been convicted for their alleged crime, but are simply awaiting trial. Requiring cash bail for lower-level crimes has come under scrutiny by criminal justice reformers for keeping innocent prisoners in jail, and judges in several counties have expanded the use of personal recognizance (PR) bonds instead of cash bonds in such cases.
However, this approach itself leads to problems for society. A number of high-profile violent crimes have been committed by defendants released on both cash and PR bonds. In 2021, the legislature banned the release of people on PR bonds if they have been charged with violent offenses, though they remain eligible to be released on cash bonds and may well commit crimes while awaiting trial. Thus, the issue of setting appropriate bail underscores the need to expedite the right to a speedy trial.
Examining Trial Although few defendants request one, the accused has the right to an examining trial in felony cases. A magistrate reviews the facts to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to send the case to a grand jury. If the facts warrant, the charges may be dismissed or bail adjusted.
The Grand Jury and Pretrial Activity
Although a grand jury sometimes issues an indictment before the accused is arrested, a felony case is usually bound over to a grand jury for indictment after arrest and arraignment. A grand jury should not be confused with a petit jury, which is the trial jury. Grand juries do not determine a person's guilt or innocence as trial juries do; the accused may not even be asked to appear before the grand jury. Instead of hearing the defense, the grand jury primarily weighs the evidence in the hands of the prosecutor to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to convict when the case is taken to trial. If it determines the existence of such evidence, the grand jury returns a "true bill" approving an indictment, which constitutes formal charges that enable the case to go to trial; only rarely does a grand jury refuse to indict by issuing a "no bill."

If the prosecutor does not have enough evidence to convict, there is no point in bringing the case to trial. Trying a case on flimsy evidence not only costs the taxpayers money, but it also causes the accused to suffer needless expense, lost time, and a damaged reputation. The right to a grand jury indictment is guaranteed in both the Texas and federal courts to protect the rights of innocent citizens against harass- ment on unjustified charges.
In practice, grand juries are usually made up of ordinary citizens who have never been trained to critically evaluate cases and so usually act as a rubber stamp for the prosecutors. Some states have abolished the grand jury in favor of writs of information, in which a judge evaluates the evidence to determine if there is sufficient evidence to go to trial. Texas guar- antees the right to indictment in all felony cases but uses the writ of information to charge people with misdemeanors.
Pretrial Hearings After the indictment, the defendant has the right to yet another hearing, sometimes called the second arraignment. A district judge (rather than a justice of the peace) presides as the formal indictment is read, and the defendant enters a plea. If the plea is guilty, a later hearing is

scheduled to set punishment. Most often the defendant pleads not guilty at this point, and the case is placed on the docket scheduling the case for subsequent trial. Attorneys may pres-ent a variety of motions, such as a motion for the suppression of certain evidence or a motion for a trial delay, known as a continuance. Other subjects of pretrial hearings concern the pris-oner’s mental competence or a request for a change of venue—a change in the site of a trial. A person cannot be held morally and criminally responsible for a crime if, at the time of
the offense, mental illness made it impossible for the person to recognize that it was wrong. There is considerable controversy as to the effects of mental disorder, so professional tes-timony may be necessary to establish legal insanity, and psychiatric opinion is frequently divided. It is rare that the courts find a defendant not guilty by reason of insanity. A change of venue may be necessary when the news media have so publicized a case that it
becomes impossible to select an unbiased jury locally or when inflamed public opinion may prevent a fair trial. A real tension exists between the rights of the free press and the rights of the accused, and in a modern society the rights of the accused can be protected only with great vigilance by the courts.
The Plea Bargain Ideally, the trial is the final step in society’s elaborate guarantees of due process. Only through the deliberations in the courtroom can our system’s genuine concern for justice emerge. Yet for most people who are accused of a crime, their final day in court never comes. In fact, the system is designed to discourage and even punish those who choose to exercise their right to trial. Most cases end in plea bargaining—a secret bargaining session with the prosecutor

Facing overcrowded dockets and limited staff, prosecuting attorneys usually meet with
the accused and offer a deal in exchange for a plea of guilty, which eliminates the need for a trial. The usual deal is to offer to drop some of the charges, to recommend probation or a lighter sentence, or to charge the accused with a lesser crime. The prosecutor may agree to defer prosecution, delaying the case and later dropping charges if the defendant meets conditions much like those required under probation. Such plea agreements save tax money and court time and may be useful to law enforcement, such as when certain defendants are given a lighter sentence in exchange for testifying against fellow criminals who have com-mitted more serious crimes. On the other hand, the guilty obviously benefit from plea bargaining because they are not
punished for the full measure of their crimes. Justice is thus exchanged for a cheaper system that benefits the guilty. Defense attorneys frequently encourage their clients to accept the bargain to save them the effort of a courtroom trial, and some become as much agents for the prosecution as advocates for the defense. The innocent and those who are unwilling to trade their rights for a secret backroom bargain take the chance of being punished more severely for demanding a trial.
The Trial
Unless the defense waives the right to a trial by jury, the first major step in a trial is the selec-tion of a jury. The right to a trial by jury is often regarded as one of the most valuable rights available in the criminal justice system.22
In fact, every state provides for trial by jury in all
but the most minor cases, and Texas goes even further, providing for the right to trial by jury in every criminal case. Nevertheless, the right to trial by jury in a criminal case is one of the most frequently
waived rights, especially in cases where the defendant is an object of community prejudice or if the alleged crime is particularly outrageous. If the right to a jury trial is waived, the presiding judge determines the verdict. Regardless of whether or not a person chooses to exercise it, the right to trial by jury remains a valuable alternative to decisions by possibly arbitrary judges.
Trial by Jury During initial questioning, known as voir dire questioning, attorneys may ask prospective jurors about their possible biases, their previous knowledge of the case, or any opinions they may have formed. Either the prosecution or the defense may challenge a prospective juror for reason of prejudice, and the presiding judge will evaluate that chal-lenge. Furthermore, both the prosecution and the defense may dismiss some jurors without cause by using a limited number of peremptory challenges, also called strikes, depending on the kind of case involved. Considering occupations, social status, and attitudes of pos-sible jurors, experienced attorneys and prosecutors use peremptory challenges to select a friendly jury. Some have been known to use psychologists to assist in the selection process, and lucrative consulting businesses have developed to assist attorneys in jury selection.
The Adversary Process The trial itself is based on an adversary process in which two parties to a case, the prosecution and the defense, arm themselves with whatever evi-dence they can muster and battle in court, under the rules of law, to final judgment. Such a system cannot operate fairly unless both the defense and the prosecution have an equal opportunity to influence the verdict. Hence procedural guarantees are designed to ensure that both sides have equal access to an understanding of the laws and the evidence. So that equal knowledge of the laws is guaranteed, the legal knowledge of the prosecution is bal-anced by the right of the defendant to have legal counsel. Because the government has the power to seize evidence and to force witnesses to testify under oath, the defense must be given that same pow

n the adversary system, each side can challenge the material evidence and cross-examine
witnesses who have been presented by the opposition. However, only evidence that is pre-sented in court can be evaluated, and both parties to a case have an interest in concealing evidence that could benefit the opposition. Because it is the legal responsibility of the prosecutor to prove guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt, the burden of proof lies with the state. The defense has no responsibility to present evidence of the defendant’s guilt, nor can the defendant be forced to take the stand to testify. On the other hand, because the responsibility of the prosecutor is to convict the guilty rather than the innocent, it is a violation of due process for the government to withhold evidence that could benefit the accused—but it happens. There is no way of knowing how many unjust verdicts have been rendered because all the evidence was not presented.
The Jury Charge In jury trials, once the evidence has been presented, the judge reads the charge to the jury, which includes the judge’s instructions about how the law applies in the case. The judge will instruct the jurors to ignore such things as hearsay testimony and other illegal evidence to which they may have been exposed during the course of the trial. (Realistically, however, it is difficult for jurors to erase from their minds the impact of ille-gal testimony.) The judge is supposedly neutral and cannot comment on the weight of the evidence that has been presented.

The Verdict After the judge’s charge to the jury, the prosecution and defense are each allowed to summarize the case. During their summary remarks, the prosecu-tor will comment that the evidence points toward guilt, and the defense will conclude that the evidence is insuf-ficient to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury then retires to decide the verdict—guilty or not guilty. Texas law requires that all the jurors agree on the verdict in criminal cases. The judge will declare a mis-trial if the jury cannot agree, but the defendant may be tried again.
probation
A judge’s sentence allowing an offender to serve time outside a correctional institution but under specific restrictions, often under the supervision of a probation officer.
The Sentence Regardless of whether the judge or the jury determines guilt, the judge may prescribe the sentence, unless the defendant requests that the jury do so. In considering the character of the defendant, any past criminal record, and the circumstances surrounding the crime, the judge may assess a penalty between the minimum and maximum provided by law. A judge may sentence an offender to probation, which allows the person to serve the sentence outside a correctional institution under specific restrictions, often under the supervi-sion of a probation officer. Similarly, a judge may use deferred adjudication to postpone final sentencing in a criminal case, and after a satisfactory probationary period, the charges are dismissed.
Judges have a great deal of latitude in assessing penalties, so the fate of a defendant will
depend in large part on the attitudes of the presiding judge. Different judges sometimes assess vastly different penalties for the same crime committed under similar circumstances. If the convicted criminal is sentenced to prison, time served in jail before and during trial
is usually deducted from the sentence of the guilty. For the innocent, however, the time served awaiting trial is a casualty of an imperfect system of justice that underlines the necessity for care in accusing and trying people

The Post-Trial Proceedings To protect the accused from double jeopardy, a person who is acquitted (found not guilty) cannot be tried again for the same offense. However, protection from double jeopardy is much more limited than many citizens believe. In the event of a mistrial or an error in procedure in which a person is not acquitted, another trial may be held for the same offense on the theory that the defendant was never put in jeopardy by the first trial. A person found not guilty of one crime may be tried for other related offenses. For example, a person who is accused of driving 75 miles per hour through a school zone, going the wrong way on a one-way street, striking down a child in the crosswalk, and then leaving the scene of the accident has com-mitted four crimes. Being acquitted of one of them does not free the defendant of possible charges for each of the other offenses. Likewise, such acts as bank robbery and kidnapping may violate both federal and state law, and the accused may be tried by both jurisdictions.
The Appeals Process The defendant may appeal a guilty verdict, but the state cannot appeal a not guilty verdict, because doing so would constitute double jeopardy. Mis-demeanor cases from justices of the peace and municipal courts may be either appealed or completely retried, de novo, in the county courts. Appeals from county and district courts go to one of fourteen courts of appeals and finally to the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals. Appellate procedure is designed to review the law as applied by lower courts, not to evaluate
evidence to determine guilt or innocence. Its major concern is procedure. Even if overruled, the antics of defense attorneys in raising frequent objections to procedure during a trial may build a case for a later appeal. If serious procedural errors are found, the appellate courts may return the case to a lower court for retrial. Such a retrial does not constitute double jeopardy. Having exhausted the rights of appeal in the Texas
courts, very few cases are appealed to the federal courts, which have jurisdiction in federal law. Thus, the grounds for appeal to federal courts would be the asser-tion that the state courts have violated the U.S. Consti-tution or other federal law.
The Special Case of Juveniles As the result of a reform effort in the nineteenth century, most states began to provide special treat-ment for children. Texas followed their lead by replacing all adult criminal procedures in juvenile cases with special civil procedures for most under age 17. Under the legal fiction that juveniles were not being punished for crimes, lax procedures were used that would never have been permitted in adult criminal courts. Court proceedings were secret, the rights to counsel and to trial by jury were ignored, standards of evidence were relaxed, and frequently charges were not specific. As a result of federal court rulings, much of due pro-cess has since been restored to juvenile proceedings—except the rights to bail, a grand jury indictment, and a public trial. Juvenile proceedings remain civil, and
nile records may be sealed from the public with the approval of the juvenile judge, who is usually appointed by the county’s judges or juvenile board to have exclusive jurisdiction in such cases. The law allows juvenile felony arrest warrants to be entered into statewide computers, and police can gather information such as juvenile fingerprints and photographs. A majority of children arrested for lesser crimes are counseled and released into the
custody of their parents, placed on probation, or held in county juvenile detention cen-ters. Some of the more serious offenders are institutionalized at state secure facilities and halfway houses operated by the Texas Juvenile Justice Board. The most serious offenders may be certified to stand criminal trial as adults if they are age 14 or older.
Criminal Justice Policies LO 10.4 Evaluate punishment and rehabilitation policies.
By providing public institutions that extract justice, society offers an alternative to private revenge and the resulting feuds that plagued the early stages of Western civilization. Until the eighteenth century, punishment meant imposing physical or financial pain. But ideas of human dignity led to the development of prisons to deny a person liberty as a more humane way of punishing. Today, although some prisoners brutalize each other, the death penalty is the only remnant of formal physical punishment left in the law.
Felony Punishment The Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) supervises the state’s adult correctional functions for convicted felons—probation, prison, and parole.

 and corrections departments, TDCJ sets standards and provides funding, training, information, and techni-cal assistance to local officers.
Prison The criminal justice department also operates correctional institutions for those offenders not granted probation. Texas has privatized some of its prisons and state jails, which now operate under contract with several prison management companies. Texas’s prison population has recently declined to 134,000.23
parole After an initial stay in prison, prisoners serving the remainder of their sentences under supervision in the community.
Parole After an initial stay in prison, parole allows many inmates to serve the remainder of their sentences under supervision in the community. The Board of Pardons and Paroles decides which inmates will be granted early release under parole, and the TDCJ is responsible for their supervision after release. Inmates serving life sentences for capital crimes committed as adults are not eligible for
parole, and those convicted of certain violent offenses must serve at least one-half of their sentences before being considered for parole. Those convicted of other offenses must serve only one-fourth of their sentences or 15 years, whichever is less. However, additional tim

against the sentence is allowed for making a positive effort toward rehabilitation, good behavior, and providing various services such as serving as a prison trusty assigned to assist prison staff. As a result, an inmate may become eligible for parole in fewer calendar years than the original sentence indicated. The Board of Pardons and Paroles does not grant parole automatically when prisoners
become eligible. Instead, the board examines each inmate’s record for positive evidence of rehabilitation. When granted parole, the freed prisoner must abide by strict codes of conduct under the general supervision of parole officers. Parole, as the concept has developed, should not be forgiveness but a continuation of the
process of correction. Parole rehabilitation is based on the idea that the elimination of anti-social attitudes can be more effectively accomplished when the individual is not severed from society. Parole is also far less expensive than incarceration—supervision of a prison inmate costs as much as 20 times that of a parolee.
Clemency Although it rarely does so, the Board of Pardons and Paroles may take the initiative to recommend that the governor grant executive clemency (leniency) such as a par-don, a commutation of sentence, or a reprieve. Because conviction for crime carries a legal condemnation as well as a possible sentence, a full pardon is designed to absolve a citizen from the legal consequences of his or her crime. A commutation of sentence is a reduction in punishment. A reprieve is temporary interruption of punishment. The governor may grant less, but not more, clemency than the board recommends. Without board approval, the governor may grant only one 30-day reprieve to delay execution in a capital case.
Misdemeanor Punishment
State government assumes the responsibility for convicted felons, but those convicted of the misdemeanors for which confinement is prescribed will serve their terms in jails operated by local governments, usually counties. Jails often fail to rehabilitate because jail staffs and physical facilities are designed to maintain custody rather than to rehabilitate. The majority of prisoners in county jails are either awaiting trial or being held for other agencies (federal or state)—these jails are designed as human warehouses. Those who are actually serving their sentences in a county jail will be there for only a
short period of time, usually less than one year. This is insufficient time to correct criminal attitudes that the prisoner may have been forming for a lifetime. Many of those who serve their sentences in local jails have been convicted of habitual vices such as drugs, gambling, prostitution, and drunkenness, which are not amenable to rehabilitation in a jail setting. Courts, however, increasingly use diversionary programs that allow minor drug offenders to undergo rehabilitation as an alternative to jail sentences.
Evaluating Punishment and Rehabilitation Policies Texas jails and penitentiaries are intended to have several functions: 1. Punishment or retribution is society’s way of settling accounts with those who have vio-lated its norms. The concept of justice normally requires proportionality—the punishment should fit the crime.
2. Incapacitation of criminals by isolating them from the law-abiding population is an effort to protect society from future crimes. Yet for most crimes, society is unwilling to prescribe the permanent imprisonment of convicted criminals and, as a result, it must prepare them for reentry into socie

3. Deterrence of criminals is society's effort at discouraging criminal behavior by threat of punishment; society uses punishment of convicted criminals as an example to discourage would-be lawbreakers.
4. Rehabilitation of convicted criminals is supposed to allow those who are ultimately released to take useful and noncriminal roles in society-the effort to correct criminals antisocial attitudes and behavior.
The strongest critics of the criminal justice system argue that jails and prisons perform none of these functions in practice. Its defenders contend that the state's criminal justice policies are at least partially responsible for containing crime in Texas.
Punishment and Incapacitation Despite plea bargaining, probation, and parole practices that cut short the punishment and isolation prescribed in the law, Texas still has one of the highest rates of imprisonment in the nation. Table 10.2 shows that Texas also has a larger percentage of its population on probation and parole than most other states. Only Arizona, Arkansas, Idaho, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Oklahoma have a larger percentage of their populations in prison than Texas." One might expect that states like Texas with high rates of imprisonment would have a much lower crime rate, yet ironically the Texas index crime rate is above the national average. Texas has executed more people than any other state, yet it still has a murder rate comparable to that of most other states. Why would this be the case?
Table 10.2 Persons in Prison, on Probation, and on Parole per 100,000 Population
Federal
43
5
Texas
Prisoners
307
On probation
1,138
Texas Ranking Among 50 States
7
12
9
443
1,559
On parole
40
50 States
270
469
Source: The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2021-Statistical Tables and Probation and Parole in the United States, 2021.
CTO
Why would Texas have a higher crime rate than the national average when it has a larger share of its population in prison, on probation, and on parole?
Deterrence Criminologists usually argue that severity of punishment is less important
in deterring crime than the certainty of punishment. Perpetrators may not consider the severity of punishment when they commit their crimes if they expect to avoid punishment altogether. In fact, punishment is far from certain across the nation or in Texas. Victim surveys indicate that, nationwide, a majority of crimes are never even reported to law enforcement." Even among those index crimes that are known to law enforcement, about 13 percent are cleared with an arrest in Texas. As a result, the vast majority of criminals are never punished for the crimes they commit. Furthermore, crime is caused by a number of systemic, social, and personal factors that may not be mitigated by the fear of punish-
ment alone.
Rehabilitation Some inmates may eventually become law-abiding citizens, but for
many inmates, prisons are failures as institutions of rehabilitation-almost half of those
released from prison will again be arrested within three years of their release. Table 10.3

Table 10.3 Three-Year Rearrest Rates for Texas Institutions of Rehabilitation
Institution of Rehabilitation
Three-Year Rearrest Rate
49.6
Felony community supervision (probation)
47.6
Prison
State jail
63.0
Source: Legislative Budget Board, Statewide Criminal Justice Recidivism and Revocation Rates, January 2021, p. 4.
CTO
Briefly evaluate Texas's state correctional institutions based on their success at rehabilitation.
shows three-year rearrest rates for Texas institutions of rehabilitation. Rehabilitation is far from certain in existing state criminal justice institutions. And as time passes, an even greater proportion of prisoners are rearrested. The BJS reported the nine-year rate of rearrest across the nation was 83 percent." A major factor in crime remains the failure of correctional systems to correct.
Sizing Up the Death Penalty Debate
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled the application of Texas's death penalty to be cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments in the cases Furman Georgia and Branch v. Texas, 408 U.S. 238 (1972). These cases concluded that the death penalty was random, arbitrary, and discriminatory as it had been applied, but left the door open for states to reinstate the death penalty by more carefully defining capital offenses and establishing stricter procedures for its application. As a result, several states passed new death
penalty laws and Texas was among the first states to have their capital punishment statutes
upheld in Gregg v. Georgia and Jurek v. Texas 428 U.S. 153 (1976).
Since states began to reinstitute the death penalty in 1976, the death penalty debate has raged across the political scene. Much of the debate can be analyzed by some of the same standards used to evaluate other forms of punishment. The death penalty effectively punishes and incapacitates, but whether it does so justly is open to debate. And while it is not designed to rehabilitate, whether capital punishment actually deters murder remains an
open question.
The Case for the Death Penalty Proponents of the death penalty argue that some crimes such as mass murder and the killing of children are so heinous that only capi- tal punishment is proportionate; no punishment other than the death penalty can achieve justice. The Texas death penalty statute is very specific in limiting capital punishment to such horrific crimes as murders committed against children, firefighters, or law enforcement officers; multiple murders; and murders committed during other felonies such as rape and robbery.
Death penalty supporters contend that capital punishment is a deterrent to crime and that would-be murderers and terrorists will avoid putting their own lives in jeopardy by committing these crimes. Proponents point out that inmates already serving life sentences would face no additional punishment for murdering prison guards unless they are subject to the death penalty. Death penalty supporters also argue that capital punishment is a useful tool in law enforcement; interrogators and prosecutors can use the threat of a death sentence as a way of persuading suspects to incriminate fellow criminals.
The Case against the Death Penalty Critics of the death penalty argue that capital punishment is not a deterrent to crime. Ironically, states with capital punish-ment have consistently had a higher murder rate than the states without it. Since 1976, Figures 10.3 and 10.4 show that most more than four out of five executions occurred in the South, which continues to have the highest murder rate of any region, while the low-est murder rate is found in the Northeast, which has executed the fewest (0.3 percent).28
historic pattern of such statistics has been interpreted to mean that death penalty laws do not act as a deterrent to murder
Capital Punishment, Executions, and Murder Rates • Figure 10.3 shows the legal status of capital punishment in the fifty states and the number of executions carried out in them between 1976 and July 1 2023. Note that the death penalty is legal in southern and western states, but that most executions have actually been carried out in the South, especia
• Figure 10.4 shows the murder rate in death penalty states and non-death penalty states. As a group, states with the death penalty experience a murder rate greater than those without capital punishmen
Opponents believe that killing can never be just, even when it is punishment for a crime.
They contend that justice cannot be served when innocent people may be executed. Sixteen inmates on Texas’s death row have been exonerated, and there is a real danger that innocent persons can be and have been executed. Pointing to examples like that of Cameron Todd Willingham (Image 10.6) executed in a case in which advanced forensic analysis indicate that no crime may have taken place at all, opponents argue that once such a prisoner has been wrongfully executed, the mistake can never be corrected

ot be proportionate because it remains arbitrary, random, and discriminatory. Rather than being based solely on the seriousness of the offense, the death pen-alty is arbitrarily carried out in some states and not others. For example, since 1976 more than one-third of all executions have occurred in Texas alone.29
Even
within states, some district attorneys have historically been much more likely to seek the death penalty and some court systems have been more likely to convict in capital cases. For example, more than one-third of all prisoners on Texas’s death row are from Harris County alone.30
Race also seems to be a factor in capital pun-ishment as 46 percent of those on the state’s death row are African Americans even though they account for only 13 percent of the general population.31 Instead of error-prone, arbitrary, and discrimina-★ PRQ What are the ethical reasons to keep the death penalty? What ethical arguments can be made to abolish it?
tory punishment, opponents argue that every state now allows adequate alternatives to the death penalty. Life sentences without the possibility of parole serve justice and are far less expensive than the death pen-alty process. Many states would appear to agree with this logic. Figure 10.3 shows that 23 states states have
now abolished the death penalty altogether, and even in those states that still include capital punishment in their penal codes, prosecutors are now seeking the death penalty less often.
Applying What You Have Learned about Law and Due Process LO 10.5 Apply what you have learned about the due process of law.
You learned that certain racial and ethnic groups have a disproportionate number of encoun-ters with law enforcement in Texas. A number of those encounters have resulted in contro-versial outcomes and efforts to reform the criminal justice system. Texas passed the Sandra Bland Act, but a widely publicized murder of a Black former Houstonian, George Floyd, by a white Minneapolis police officer spurred calls for further reform. So, we asked Representative Senfonia Thompson to explain the terms of the George Floyd Act she introduced, but which the 2021 legislative session failed to pass. Representative Senfronia Thompson (“Ms. T”) was first elected to the Texas House in 1972.
She has subsequently been reelected 25 consecutive times, and is the longest serving-woman and African American in Texas history. During her illustrious career Representative Thompson has been the author of dozens of impactful laws, including the James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Act, the Michael Morton Act (to create a fairer criminal justice system in Texas) and the Sexual Assault Program Fun
Politics in Practice
Texas's George Floyd Act: House Bill 88
by Senfonia Thompson
Texas State Representative, House District 141
May 25, 2020: The day that the world turned upside down. In the middle of a pandemic, the entire world focused its attention on Minneapolis, Minnesota, Cell phone videos were filming what has become an all too familiar scene, a Black man suffering inhumane, and even criminal treatment at the hands of a member of a police force. The world, once again witnessing the brutal treatment of a Black man by law enforcement; this time it was a handcuffed Black man uttering his final words, pinned to the ground under the knee of a white police officer. But it has been so many others too.
George Floyd. Say his name. George. Perry. Floyd. Jr. A husband, a father, a son, a brother, a friend. He died an unthinkable death in front of the world, his final words begging for his life. "I can't breathe." During the last three minutes of his life, he repeated those words over and over, more than 20 times, only to have his plea dismissed by officers, over and over.
The death of George Floyd, Jr., and his words, have become a rallying cry against systemic racism and police brutality. Millions took to the streets in solidarity, the likes of which had not been seen since the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. It started a movement in our country aimed at social justice and police reform.
My House Bill 88 was given the moniker, "The George Floyd Act." But it was not as much
about him, as it was about giving law enforcement a clear set of guidelines to help them in their
jobs and then holding them accountable for their unlawful actions. The legislation addressed the following points:
Cause of Action. The bill would have created a state cause of action for the deprivation of rights under the law, granting legal and equitable relief to address the qualified immunity of law enforcement and grants attorney fees to plaintiffs who are successful in their lawsuits against police.
Created and amended duties of police. The bill would have added a duty to intervene for police. This means that an officer would have had a duty to step in to prevent the unlawful treatment of a person at the hands of another officer. It would have added a duty to identify for police - meaning that officers would have to identify themselves ahead of any action. A duty to render aid would have been required. This would have given anyone in police custody assurance of medical aid if needed while in police custody. HB 88 would have removed the duty to arrest on all crimes requirement for law enforcement during an interaction.
Narrowed use of force rules. The bill would have created a strict prohibition on chokeholds
by police. It declared that all use of force must be appropriate for both the circumstances
of the interaction and the seriousness of the offense and demanded that first officers must
attempt to deescalate and warn the suspect, and not pose risk to bystanders. It would have
permitted the use of force, but only after the risk of imminent threat of bodily injury or
death exists.
Non-jailable crimes. The bill would have ended arrests for non-jailable crimes and required agencies to create policies for such arrests.
Required corroboration for some offenses. In the instance of an undercover police officers in a narcotics cases., it would have required corroboration before that officer’s testimony is given. If this had been the law during the Tom Coleman days, the falsified crimes in Tulia, Texas would not have made history for the imprisonment of over 30 citizens for drug crimes they did not commit.
Created a reporting process for violations and misconduct. The bill would have required violations of policy and law by police be set out in a clear disciplinary matrix that cannot be overturned or changed by contract with a police union.
This was not an easy fight, but when has the fight for justice ever been easy? The Texas Legislature is dominated by members of the opposite political ideology. But it was time. It was time to make sure that no mother must bury their child, that no child must grow up not knowing a parent. We should have made sure that the list of names – Javier Ambler, Jamail Amron, Darius Tarver, Zachery Anderson, Lebarron Ballard, Dewayne Lafond, Jasman Washington, Joshua Johnson, Michael Ramos – ended with George Floyd.
Questions for Critical Thinking 1. What systemic problems in law enforcement would the George Floyd Act have addressed? 2. Had it been passed, how would the George Floyd Act have reformed law enforcement use-of-force practices in Texas? How would ending arrests for nonjailable offenses have reduced the potential for arrests to escalate into violence?
3. Would the George Floyd Act have caused law enforcement agents to hesitate in using force when necessary to protect the public safety

Chapter Summary
LO 10.1 Analyze civil law and the policy issues related
to it. Within the American legal system, cases are classified as either civil or criminal Civil cases primarily involve the rights of private parties or organizations Resolution is based on the concept of responsibility rather than guilt
Some examples of the broad categories of civil law are family
law, real estate law, probate, corporate law, civil regulations, labor
law, and torts. Recent political issues have developed around
eminent domain, liability insurance, and tort claims The Texas
legislature has undertaken tort reform in an effort to lighten
overcrowded court dockets and limit allegedly frivolous suits.
At the urging of business, insurance companies, and medical
professionals. the legislature has restricted lawsuits and limited
awards for damages.
LO 10.2 Analyze the elements of crime. In an attempt to impose their values on others, the dominant elements of society have turned to government with its power to define crime and punish it. Law reflects the values of the people who make and
enforce Criminal cases deal with public concepts of proper behavior and morality as defined by law. Punishment for a violation of these concepts ranges from a fine to imprisonment to a combination of both. More serious crimes are called felonies, and minor crimes are called misdemeanors
Encounters with the criminal justice system are affected by factors such as age, gender, ethnicity, income, education, urban life, and substance abuse disorder.
LO 10.3 Analyze the concepts of due process. The court
procedures that constitute due process aim to promote justice and
protect individuals from government abuse. These procedures
are generally either written into state and national constitutions
and statutes or included in traditional codes of court process.
They govern every step in the criminal justice process, from
nearch and arrest to trial and final conviction. These procedures
guarantee the rights against unreasonable search and arrest and
against forced self-incrimination Due process also includes the
rights to an attorney, to reasonable bail, and to examining trials;

the defendant has the right to be charged by a reliable process, to be able to present evidence, and to confront opposing witnesses at a trial by jury,
It is largely through due process that the courts aim to blend Two conflicting goals of society: (1) to protect society according to the state's legal concepts of right and wrong and (2) to protect the rights of the individual charged with wrongdoing. Unfortunately. the goal of due process is often an ideal rather than a reality. These careful guarantees of due process are often circumvented by such practices as plea bargaining
LO 10.4 Evaluate punishment and rehabilitation policies. Correctional institutions such as prisons and jails are intended to punish, incapacitate, deter, and rehabilitate. Unfortunately, they perform these functions poorly-the low rates of arrest mean that most criminals will not be punished or isolated from society, and

hence, they are not effectively deterred from committing crimes. Even among prisoners who have been arrested and punished, a majority of inmates return to crime after their release. The death penalty effectively punishes and incapacitates, but whether does so justly is open to debate. And while it is not designed to rehabilitate, whether capital punishment actually deters murder remains an open question
LO 10.5 Apply what you have learned about the due process of law. You learned about how Representative Thompson introduced the George Floyd Act to reform use-of-force and other law-enforcement practices and to prevent violent escalation during police encounters with all Texans. And although her proposal was not enacted by the Legislature, much reforms remain part of the ongoing political debate in Texas









































































































































































