On May 29, 2023, the Legislature passed IB 1, completing the appropriations process that authorized the state of Texas to spend $321.3 billion budget for fiscal years 2024 and 2025. Counting one dollar every second without resting for weekends, holidays, and coffee breaks, it would take about 10,188 years to count these appropriations! Texas has the third- largest state budget, exceeded only by those of California and New York.
State spending has steadily risen, with each successive budget larger than the preceding one, resulting in a long succession of record expenditures. However, Figure 12.1 shows that state spending has tracked inflation and population increases. Inflation alone explains some increases in government spending: just as it has driven up the
costs of what citizens and families buy, it has also driven up the costs of what government buys. However, inflation has also driven up salaries and profits that residents use to pay their taxes. The Texas population has grown more rapidly than that of most other states. Each new person must be served, protected, and educated. Of course, the demands of a larger popula- tion for increased state services are offset by the fact that more people are also paying taxes to support them. Adjusted for population and inflation, state spending has increased a total of only 0.5 percent over the past 10 years.
Revenues
LO 12.1 Analyze and evaluate Texas tax policies.
So, from where do the funds for this spending come? Surprisingly, much state revenue comes from sources other than state taxes. During the 2022-23 fiscal years, only 43 percent of Texas revenues are from state taxes, whereas federal funding-mostly grants-in-aid-accounts for
Figure 12.1 Trends in Texas State Expenditures, 2014-23
This figure shows the growth in state appropriations (in billions) during the last decade. However, state spending has kept pace with population growth and inflation; when they are taken into account, relative spending has remained quite steady.

Figure 12.2 Sources of State Revenue, 2022–23 This figure shows the multiple sources of state revenue estimated for the 2022–23 budget cycle. Notice that the state’s largest single revenue source is federal funding, and the largest state source is the general sales ta
42 percent. The remainder comes from interest on investments; revenues from public lands; and licenses, fees, and other minor nontax sources such as the lottery. Figure 12.2 shows the major sources of Texas state revenues.
Taxation
Governments rely on a variety of tax sources, and each level of government—national, state, and local—tends to specialize in certain types of taxes.
National Taxes With the ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment to the U.S. Consti-tution in 1913, the income tax became available to the national government. Individual and corporate income taxes immediately became the national government’s major source of fund-ing and today constitute about 54 percent of federal tax revenues, with most of the remainder coming from payroll taxes for Social Security and Medicare.
State Taxes Property taxes were once the major source of state revenue, but property values collapsed during the Great Depression of the 1930s, and with them went the property tax revenues. At the same time, demands for economic assistance and other public services skyrocketed. Forced to seek other revenue sources, states came to rely on various sales taxes. Texas adopted a tax on cigarettes in 1931, on beer in 1933, and on distilled spirits in 1935.

Additional selective sales taxes were adopted in the 1940s and 1950s, but it became apparent that a more general and more broadly based tax would be necessary to meet revenue needs. In 1961, Texas adopted a general sales tax on most items sold. At the same time, Texas, like most states, first drastically reduced its property taxes and then abandoned them for exclusive use by local governments. As a result, states have come to depend on several types of sales taxes:
1. General sales tax is a broadly based tax collected on the retail price of most items.
2. Selective sales taxes are levied on the sale, manufacture, or use of specific items such as liquor, cigarettes, and gasoline; these are also sometimes known as excise taxes. Because these taxes are usually included in the item's purchase price, they are often called hidden taxes.
3. Gross receipts taxes are taxes on the total gross revenue (sales) of certain enterprises. For example, Texas uses a broad-based margins tax (also known as the franchise tax) that applies to the gross sales of most corporations and limited partnerships after taking a deduction for the cost of goods or personnel. Small companies, sole proprietorships, and general partnerships are exempt.
Most state tax revenue comes from various sales tax collections. The general sales tax (6.25 percent on retail sales of most items) yields more of the state's revenues than any other tax, but Texas also has a margins tax, a motor fuels tax, and a motor vehicle sales and rental tax. In addition to severance taxes on the production of raw materials such as oil and natural gas, Texas also collects special taxes on a range of items and activities, including tobacco, alcohol, registration of motor vehicles, hotel and motel occupancy, and insurance company operations.
Local Taxes Many services financed by state governments in other states are left to local governments in Texas. State government has also imposed many mandates (required services) on local governments, especially school districts, without funding them. As a result, state taxes have remained low, but local taxes are higher than in many states.
Property taxes are the major source of revenue for virtually all local governments-cities, counties, and special districts. Ad valorem taxes may be assessed on the value of real property (land and buildings) or personal property (possessions such as furniture and automobiles); most Texas local governments primarily tax real property. A central appraisal authority in each county determines property values for all taxing units in the county according to uniform state standards and procedures. The tax rate is set by local policy-making bodies-city coun- cils, county commissioners courts, and boards of trustees for special districts.
Local governments also impose other taxes, such as sales taxes up to 2 percent applied to items taxable under the state general sales tax. Other local revenue sources include miscel laneous taxes, user fees, and federal grants-in-aid.
The Politics of Taxation
Taxes cannot be evaluated objectively. As with all public policy, the state's tax policy is
designed by elected politicians who make tax decisions on the basis of which groups will be
most affected by different types of taxes, and people tend to evaluate taxes according to their
social and economic position. Although arguments about taxation usually focus on the "pub-
lic interest," one must recognize that the millions of dollars in campaign funds, the millions
of hours devoted to campaigning, the thousands of lobbyists who fill our state and national
capitols-all the resources of persuasion our political system can muster-are called into
play not simply to settle some abstract academic argument. Politics, especially the politics of
taxation, affects the way people live in real and concrete ways. Any evaluation of taxes must
be based on the way particular taxes affect various groups in society.
general sales tax
A broadly based tax collected on the retail price of most items.
selective sales taxes
Taxes levied on the sale, manufacture, or use of specific items such as liquor, cigarettes, and gasoline; these are also sometimes known as excise taxes.
hidden taxes
Taxes included in an item's purchase price.
gross receipts taxes
Taxes on the gross revenues (sales) of certain enterprises.
severance taxes
Taxes on the production of raw materials such as oil and natural gas.
ad valorem taxes
Taxes assessed on the value of real property (land and buildings) and personal property (possessions such as furniture and automobiles).

The Tax Base: Who Should Pay? Not all taxes are equally effective in raising funds for the public till. Tax rates (the amount per unit on a given item or activity) may be raised or lowered, but simply raising the tax rate may not guarantee increased revenues. For example, raising sales tax rates may cause people to cut back on purchases of the taxed items.
Tax rates affect the tax base (the object or activity taxed). Excessive property taxes discour age construction and repair of buildings. High income taxes can discourage general economic activity and individual initiative, undermining the tax base. To raise necessary revenue, a tax must not discourage too much of the activity that produces the revenue.
Most governments tax a wide variety of items and activities because they have found that broad-based taxes (those paid by a large number of taxpayers), such as property taxes, general sales taxes, and income taxes, are most effective at raising revenue. High tax rates on a narrow base tend to destroy the base and thus make the tax ineffective as a source of revenue.
In the battle over taxation, one of the most intense issues is what should be taxed. The decision about what to tax is really a decision about whom to tax and how heavily. Those with influence on decision makers try to get special tax treatment for themselves and other taxpay- ers in their group. What seems to motivate almost every group is the principle that the best tax is the one somebody else pays. The three most common political rationalizations for taxing various social groups differently are (1) to regulate their behavior, (2) to tax them according to the benefits they receive, and (3) to tax them according to their ability to pay.
Regulatory Taxes Taxes do more than simply pay for the services of government; they often serve as a tool for social or economic control. Governments sometimes use regulatory taxes to reward approved behavior with lower taxation or punish socially undesirable action with a higher tax.
Most state regulatory taxes are designed to control isolated individual choices, especially those with moral overtones, and are sometimes called sin taxes. The most prominent example of such state regulatory taxation is the use tax to discourage the consumption of items such as alcohol or tobacco. Texas has an excise tax, or selective sales tax, on alcoholic beverages and a cigarette tax of $1.41 per pack.
Texans continue to drink and smoke, so such state use taxes do not entirely prevent "sin," but they place a substantial share of the tax burden on the "sinner." The regulatory intent of use taxes may be a rationalization to place the tax burden on others; the most vocal advocates of alcohol and tobacco taxes are those who abstain. Proponents argue that regulatory taxes have some effect on behavior without extensive enforcement. The decline in cigarette sales in Texas may be partially attributed to cost, and young people may be deterred from smoking by the high price of cigarettes.
Benefits Received On the surface, nothing would seem fairer than taxation accord- ing to benefits received let those who benefit from a public service pay for it. Americans have become accustomed to believing that this principle operates in the private sector of the economy and should be applied in the public sector as well. A benefits-received tax is assessed according to the services received by the payers. Texas's
20-cents-per-gallon tax on gasoline is an example of a benefits-received tax. Three-fourths of
the income from gasoline and diesel fuel taxes is directed into the Texas highway trust fund
on the assumption that the amount of fuel used should represent the benefits from highway
building and maintenance.
Although not strictly a tax, tuition paid by students in state colleges and universities is
determined on the basis of the benefits-received principle. Although much of the cost of public
college education in Texas is paid out of state and local tax revenues, an increasing share of the
cost of higher education is paid by student tuition and fees, on the presumption that students
hould pay a larger share of the cost of the service from which they so greatly benefit. Likewise, revenues from hunting and fishing permits are used for wildlife management. The benefits-received principle seems reasonable, but few government services are truly
Did You Know? U.S. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes said that taxes are the price we pay for a civilized society.
special services that are provided only for special groups. Although the student is a major beneficiary of state-supported higher education, society also benefits from the skills that are added to the bank of human resources. Even people who have never owned or driven a car benefit from highways when they buy fresh tomatoes from the supermarket or go to the hospital in the event of illness. Most services of gov-ernment, like highways, schools, or law enforcement, take on the character of a public or collective good because their benefits are shared by most individuals in society whether they helped pay for them or not.
The benefits-received principle cannot be applied too broadly. Although private businesses
efficiently provide services on a benefits-received basis, a major reason for government to pro-vide a public service is to make that service available to all. Many could not afford to pay the full cost of vital public services. For example, far fewer people could afford to attend Texas’s public colleges and universities if they had to pay the full cost of higher education.
ability-to-pay taxes Taxes apportioned according to taxpayers’ financial capacity, such as property, sales, and income.
Ability to Pay Most taxes are rationalized according to some measure of taxpayers’ ability to pay them. The most common ability-to-pay taxes are apportioned according to some measure of the taxpayers’ financial capacity, such as property, sales, and income. Property taxes are rationalized on the premise that the more valuable people’s property is, the wealthier they are and hence the greater is their ability to pay taxes. Sales taxes are based on the premise that the more a person buys, the greater the individual’s purchasing power. Income taxes are based on the assumption that the more a person earns, the greater is that person’s ability to pay. No base is completely adequate as a measure of a person’s ability to pay. During Europe’s
feudal era, property reflected a person’s wealth. With the coming of the commercial revolution, actual wealth came to be measured mostly in terms of money rather than land. Nevertheless, the taxes on real estate remained, while more modern forms of ownership, such as stocks, bonds, and other securities, were less commonly taxed. Taxes on the earning or spending of money do not always reflect taxpayers’ ability to pay.
Income taxes reflect current taxable income and do not account for wealth accumulated in
past years. Furthermore, exemptions allow the taxpayer to legally avoid taxes, even on cur-rent income. Sales taxes on consumption and spending are an even less equitable measure of people’s ability to pay. Sales taxes measure wealth only as it is spent. Money saved or invested is not spent and, therefore, not taxed. Because it is a general rule of economic behavior that the wealthier a person is, the more the person saves or invests, sales taxes weigh disproportionately on the have-nots and have-littles, who must spend the largest portion of their income on the necessities of life.
Tax Rates: Progressive or Regressive Taxes? Most people would like to pay as little in taxes as possible, but it turns out that they pay quite a bit—almost one-third of their income. In effect, the average working American works almost one-third of the year (from the first day of January until about mid-April) to pay taxes to all levels of government—federal, state, and local. However, these averages obscure the real effect of taxes on the individual taxpayer. The
so-called loopholes in the federal income tax structure have been well publicized, but every tax—federal, state, and local—treats various taxpayers differently. What in the political world is used to justify the unequal burden of taxatio
rogressive Tax Rates Federal income taxes illustrate progressive tax rates because the tax rates increase as income increases. Citizens at the very bottom of the financial ladder have no taxable income and pay nothing, but as incomes increase, the rate increases step by step from 10 percent to 37 percent. However, the higher rates apply only to marginal increments in income. For example, a single person with $1,000,000 in taxable income pays 10 percent on the first $11,000, just as lower-income taxpayers do; a rate of 12 percent applies only to taxable income above $11,000 and less than $44,725; and so forth, as shown in Figure 12.3. The highest rate, 37 percent, applies only to the amount over $578,125 and not to an individual’s entire income.
Figure 12.3 Federal Income Tax Rates for Single Individuals, 2023 This figure shows that progressive income tax rates increase in stair-step fashion as incomes increase. As you compare the seven columns of rates for various income levels, notice that, regardless of total taxable income, the tax rate on the first $11,000 is 10 percent, the 12 percent rate applies only to the income between $11,001 and $44,725, and so on. Taxpayers earning over a million dollars do not pay 37 percent on their entire income—their first $11,000 is taxed at only 10 percent. Income tax rates apply only to taxable income after deductions, exemptions, and exclusions, and various tax credits may apply. More than 40 percent of Americans pay no income taxes at all though they do pay many other types of taxes.
Liberals and other supporters of progressive taxation argue that persons with larger incomes can better afford to pay higher tax rates and that lower-income persons should be left with enough of their incomes to maintain the necessities of life. Lower-income persons also spend a larger share of their incomes on consumption, which is the largest driving force in the economy. Such arguments have not convinced more conservative Texans, who adopted a state constitutional amendment that forbids a state income tax altogether.
Regressive Tax Rates By contrast, Texas has regressive tax rates, whereby the effec-
tive tax rate declines as a person's income increases. For example, the state general sales tax of 6.25 percent is proportional to the value of sales taxable items, but because of patterns of consumption, the effective rate usually declines as a person's income increases. Table 12.1 shows that if a household's income increases, so does its general sales tax payment. That fact seems reasonable-one would expect the purchases of taxable items to increase as income increases. But note that as income increases, an ever smaller percentage of that income is used for taxable purchases. Presumably, more money is saved, invested, or spent on tax-exempt items. Thus, despite exemptions for certain essential items, the effective rate of the Texas general sales tax declines as income increases; households with the lowest incomes pay an effective sales tax rate more than four times as high as those with the highest incomes. Simi- larly, taxpayers pay a smaller percentage of their incomes in property and excise taxes as their incomes increase.
There is a simple explanation for the regressive quality of most consumer taxes-the declining marginal propensity to consume. As income increases, a person saves and invests more, thus spending a smaller percentage of that income on consumer items. Compare two smokers. One earns $20,000 per year and the other $200,000 per year. Does the typical smoker who earns $200,000 per year smoke 10 times as much as the one who earns $20,000? Of course not! Let's assume that each smoker consumes one pack of cigarettes a day; each therefore pays $514.65 a year in Texas tobacco taxes. For the low-income individual, tobacco taxes represent almost 7 days of earnings, but the other smoker earned the money to pay tobacco taxes in only 5 hours and 21 minutes.
Consumption of most items follows a similar pattern. A sparkling mansion represents a
smaller share of income for the millionaire than a dilapidated shotgun house does for someone in poverty. Proportionately, the Rolls Royce is less of a burden to its owner than the old Ford pickup to its less affluent owner. Obviously, there are exceptions, but appetites do not increase proportionately with income. Consequently, almost any tax on consumption will not reflect ability to pay. Yet Texas’s state and local taxes are based on some form of consumption—property taxes, general sales taxes, gross receipts taxes, or selective sales taxes. Even business taxes may be regressive for individuals because of tax shifting. Busi-nesses regard their tax burden as part of their operating cost, and they pass much of that cost to customers in the form of higher prices. When property taxes increase, landlords raise rents. When business taxes are imposed, prices of consumer items usually increase as those taxes are passed on to customers as hidden taxes. Thus, many business taxes become, in effect, consumer taxes and, like other consumer taxes, regressive relative to income. Taking into account all state and local taxes and tax shifting, Texas has one of the most
regressive tax structures among the 50 states. Table 12.2 shows the final incidence of major state and local taxes on Texas families. Those with the lowest fifth of household incomes paid an effective school property tax rate more than three times as high as upper-income house-holds. And for low-income households, the gasoline tax represents seven times the burden that it does for upper-income households. Lower-income families even bear a disproportionate share of the state’s franchise tax on business. Some conservatives and high-income groups who sup-port regressive taxes argue that taxes on higher-income individuals should be kept low to allow them to save and invest to stimulate the economy—what is known as supply-side economics. They argue that applying higher rates to higher incomes is unfair and that sales and property
taxes are easier to collect, harder to evade or avoid, and gener- ally less burdensome than progressive income taxes. Some of them advocate a national sales tax, also known as the "fair tax," to replace the progressive federal income tax.
Other Revenues
Much of the state's revenue comes from federal grants- in-aid, and a smaller amount is generated from nontax revenues such as licenses, fees, and borrowing.
Federal Grants-in-Aid Considerable federal money is provided for Texas state and local government programs. For the 2022-23 budget period, the state received approximately $132 billion in federal funds, which represents 42 percent of state revenues. Much of what Texas spends for health and human services and for transportation originates as federal grants, as explained in Chapter 2.
Borrowing and Other Revenues At the beginning of each legislative session, the comptroller of public accounts reports to the legislature the total amount of revenues expected from current taxes and other sources, and the legislature can, in turn, appropriate no more than this amount unless it enacts new tax laws. The state may borrow money only if the legislature, by a very difficult to achieve four-fifths vote, declares an emergency or if voters amend the Texas Constitution to provide for the issuance of bonds for specific programs. Constitutional amendments have authorized the state to issue some bonds such as those that voters have approved to finance prison construction, veterans' real estate programs, and water development.
Other nontax revenues from the lottery, various licenses, fines, and fees, dividends from investments, and the sale and leasing of public lands account for a small share of the state's income.
State Spending LO 12.2 Describe the politics of state spending.
appropriations The process by which a legislative body legally authorizes a government to spend specific sums of money to provide various programs and services.
Having examined the revenue side of state policy, we now turn to the appropriations process and the politics of state spending.
The Appropriations Process It is through the appropriations process that the legislature legally authorizes the state to spend money to provide its various programs and services. Appropriations bills follow the same steps as other legislation: standing committee consideration, floor action, conference commit-tee compromise, final voting, and then approval by the gove
Tax and Spending Policies
• Consistent with Texas's conservative political culture, state taxes are lower than in most other states, but Texas relies on local governments to fund a large share of state services such as public education. Texans paid only 3.8 percent of personal income in state taxes, compared to the fifty-state average of 5.5 percent-residents of only three states paid less than Texans.
• Most states rely heavily on sales and gross receipts taxes, but few states are as dependent on them as Texas, Texas
is one of eight states without any progressive personal income taxes and one of only six states without a corpo- rate income tax. Because Texas relies so much on con- sumer taxes, it has the second most regressive state and local tax system in the nation.
⚫ Texas ranked thirty-seventh in total state and local per capita spending (15 percent below the national average); Figure 12.4 shows how Texas state and local per capita spending compared among the fifty states in 2020.

During most of the process, the legislature works closely with its presiding officers and follows the recommendations of the Legislative Budget Board. The Texas governor also influ- ences the appropriations process and may ultimately use the line-item veto to strike particular parts of the appropriations bill. Rarely does the governor veto a significant share of state spending
The Politics of State Spending
A wide variety of political factors affect the level of state spending. Nowhere is the dynamic nature of politics so evident as in public finance; nowhere is the conflict between competing economic interests more visible than in the budgetary process. Behind the large figures that represent the state's final budget are vigorous conflict, compromise, and coalition building. Most of society's programs are evaluated not only according to their merit but also in light of the competing demands of other programs and other economic interests. Government programs and problems compete for a share of the public treasury-highways, education, urban decay, poverty, crime, the environment-in short, all the problems and challenges of a modern society.
Powerful political constituencies, interest groups, and their lobbyists join forces with state agencies to defend the programs that benefit them. This alliance between administrative agencies and interest groups brings great pressure to bear on the legislative process, especially targeting the powerful House Appropriations Committee, the Senate Finance Committee, and the presiding officers. Individual legislators trade votes among themselves, a process called "logrolling," to fund special projects that benefit their constituents and political allies.
No single action better typifies the political character of a state than the decisions made during the appropriations process. The whole pattern of spending is, in a sense, a shorthand description of which problems the state has decided to face and which challenges it has chosen to meet. The budget shows how much of which services the state will offer and to whom. Figure 12.5 on the next page shows how Texas spent its state revenues in the 2022-23 budget cycle. The most costly service in Texas is education, Education accounted for 36 percent of the state budget; health and human services (including Medicaid and social services) were the second most expensive, accounting for 33 percent; and transportation, primarily highways, consumed 11 percent. These three services constitute four-fifths of the state's budget, with criminal justice and a wide variety
of miscellaneous services accounting for the remainder.
Overall, Texas is a low-tax, low spending state, but it also has a somewhat lower cost of living; therefore, it is important to look more closely at what the state gets for its spending. We will outline and evaluate the state's most significant services and the major political issues surrounding them.
Education
LO 12.3 Analyze Texas educational policies and the politics of education.
The educational system in Texas includes elementary and secondary schools (the public
schools) and the college and university system (higher education).
Elementary and Secondary Schools
The concept of public schools has changed dramatically over time. Although Texans now generally agree that the state should be responsible for providing elementary and secondary schools, they intensely disagree about issues related to school governance, funding, curricu- hum, and school accountability.
igure 12.5 State Appropriations by Function, 2022–23 The largest slice of the Texas budget pie goes to education, but the portion spent for health care is rapidly increasing
History Public schools were accepted institutions in the North by the early nineteenth century, but they did not take root in the South (including Texas) until after the Civil War. Texas had established a Special School Fund with $2 million that the federal government paid the state to relinquish its claims on parts of New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Colorado, but it was not until the Constitution of 1876 provided that alternate sections of public land grants would be set aside in the Permanent School Fund that the state began to commit itself to locally administered, optional public schools.
Meaningful state support for public education started with a compulsory attendance law, enacted in 1915, and a constitutional amendment that provided for free textbooks in 1918. In 1949, the Gilmer-Aikin Act dramatically increased state funding and established the Texas Education Agency (TEA), which carries out the state's educational program today.
Recent Trends Sweeping changes in education resulted when in 1984 the Texas Legis- lature established statewide school accountability standards, using measurable standards to hold public schools responsible for their students' performance and their teachers' competence. Individual student performance is now measured by an achievement test known as the State of Texas Assessments of Academic Readiness (STAAR) and school districts as a whole and individual campuses are graded on an A through F scale based on student performance, their progress in closing gaps among low-performing student groups, and several other factors.
Although the standards used to measure public school performance are sometimes con- troversial, there has been a recent trend toward their use to bring market forces to the public school system. Some teachers and administrators receive merit pay-bonuses for improved stu- dent achievement. To introduce the element of competition among schools, the state legislature authorized the State Board of Education to establish schools with innovative special program charters that can recruit students from across existing school district boundaries. Many conserva- tive state legislators now also favor adding even more school choice by providing students with state-funded vouchers to help them pay for tuition at secular private and religious institutions.
Today, public elementary and secondary education has grown from a fledgling underfi- nanced local function into a major state-local partnership. The TEA administers more than a quarter of all state expenditures, helping local school districts educate 5.1 million students on an average school day. As you will see, public policy decisions affect the knowledge, attitudes, and earning potential of these students and over 370,000 teachers who teach them.
Public School Administration As in most other states, the Texas public school administration is a joint state-local partnership with substantial local control.
State Administration The Texas Constitution and the state legislature have established the basic decision-making organizations and financial arrangements for public education in the state. The legislature approves the budget for the state's share of the cost of public education and sets statutory standards for public schools. The State Board of Education (SBOE) is elected from 15 single-member districts across the state in partisan elections to manage the Permanent School Fund and make decisions about the public school curriculum and course standards. The governor appoints the Commissioner of Education to govern the day-to-day operations of the Texas Education Agency, which regulates and services local school districts.
Independent School Districts Texas has 1,022 independent school districts--more than any other state. These school districts are the basic structure for local control. Voters in independent school districts elect seven or nine members (depending on the district's popu- lation) for either 3- or 4-year terms. Board members may be elected at large or from single- member electoral districts in what are officially nonpartisan elections. These trustees set the district's tax rate and determine school policies within the guidelines established by the TEA. They approve the budget, contract for instructional supplies and construction, and hire and fire personnel. Their most important decision is the hiring of a professional superintendent, who is responsible for the executive or administrative functions of the school district.
Charter Schools Texas law authorizes open enrollment charter schools that may operate on
multiple campuses. Charter schools are publicly funded schools that operate independently from
the district system. The TEA gives them special charters with greater flexibility in the way they
operate, including considerable latitude in developing their own academic goals and curricula and
in choosing their faculty and staff. Some charter schools have been able to use this flexibility to
establish successful innovative programs that compare favorably to traditional public schools,
while others have been closed because of poor academic performance or financial irregularities.
The Politics of Public Education
Many of the same issues that divide the state along party lines overlap with the politics of pub-
lic education. Indeed, the state Legislature and the State Board of Education have been quite
partisan in their approach to education. Even many local school boards, which are officially
nonpartisan, have become polarized by party politics as some local party leaders are beginning
to engage in school board politics.
Social and Cultural Issues The politics of public education was once a sleepy. low-visibility affair in which there was a great deal of agreement about what education should achieve in society. However, as in much of the rest of society, social and cultural conflict have come to dominate the educational system, especially highly politicized questions about how sex, gender, race, and racism are treated in the public-school classroom and the role transgen- der students should play in the life of public schools.
The Texas Legislature has passed laws to define how these issues are to be taught in public schools. In 2021, it enacted SB 3 which removes parts of Black and Latino history from the curriculum and prohibits teaching that an individual bears guilt or blame for past racial or gender injustices. The law was designed to limit the teaching of "critical race theory," which holds that racism is not merely the result of individual prejudice or bias, but is also embedded in law and public policy. Critics of SB 3 have argued that the law will have a chilling effect on teaching about the lingering impacts of slavery and racism as well as past policies of segrega- tion, housing and employment discrimination."
The Legislature has also considered legislation about hot-button issues related to gender. For example, it adopted a law to prohibit transgender girls from competing on the same school sports teams as girls whose gender was defined at birth. The Legislature has also considered restricting transgender students' bathroom choice and pronoun usage, even as several school districts have implemented such restrictions.
Such social issues have also been central themes in a growing number of campaigns of candidates for the State Board of Education and local school boards throughout the state. Conservative parent groups have also focused on issues surrounding sex, gender, and race as they have demanded a more conservative approach to public education in local schools. In several instances, they have challenged public school libraries to remove books that touch on issues of gender and sex as either pornographic or age-inappropriate for their students.
The Curriculum One of the most important decisions concerning public education is what education should be. Should it promote traditional views of society, reinforce the dominant political culture, and teach acceptable attitudes? Or should it teach students to be independent thinkers, capable of evaluating ideas for themselves? When the Texas state educational system determines the curriculum, it must answer these fundamental questions.
The SBOE determines the basic curriculum in Texas public schools as it establishes state standards as to what students should know, laid out in the Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS) requirements. Although almost half of high school students are enrolled in career and technology programs and much remains to be done in order to meet the need for highly skilled technical workers and to provide students with practical life skills, it is in the basic courses-history, civics, biology, and English-that students are most likely to be exposed to issues that may fundamentally affect their attitudes. How should a student be exposed to the theory of evolution? Should sex education courses
offer discussion of artificial birth control or present abstinence as the only reliable method
of birth control? In the social sciences, should the political system be pictured in terms of
its ideals or as it actually operates, with all its flaws and weaknesses? How should the roles
of women and racial, ethnic, and other minorities be presented? How should elective Bible
courses be taught and by whom? Should students who are not fluent in English be gradually
taught English through bilingual education, or should they immediately be immersed in the
core curriculum taught in English?
The answers to these questions have divided along polarized conservative versus liberal lines,
and the SBOE has largely sided with conservatives, Having adopted conservative science and
literature curriculum revisions in previous years, Texas's State Board of Education caused an
uproar among liberal groups in 2018 by voting along party lines to establish conservative social
studies curriculum standards as well.
Texas Insiders
Interest Groups Fight Culture Wars Over Sex Education in the Public Schools
In 2020, the SBOE once again began the fraught battle to revise parts of the public school curriculum, this time tackling TEKS standards for health education, which may include sex education. Sex education is not required in Texas high schools, and where it is taught, state law requires that it focus on abstinence. A survey of public schools found that 58 percent of them taught abstinence- only; 17 percent took an abstinence-plus approach, and 25 percent taught no sex education at all. Where schools do teach sex education, parents must opt their children into the course for it to be available to them.
Of course, when state government adopts
policies that affect people's fundamental cultural outlook, interest groups form to defend their values, and among them are Texas Values, a conservative fundamentalist Christian organization focused on protecting the traditional family and religious values. The organization calls for Texas to continue its "common sense, abstinence-focused approach to sex education" and to oppose "Irjadical organizations like SIECUS and Texas Freedom Network, which were both started by Planned Parenthood, have been putting enormous pressure on the SBOE to adopt 'comprehensive' sex education seen in states like California and here in Texas in Austin ISD. Comprehensive sex education is simply a code name for radical sex education that teaches children that sex is theirs to explore whenever and wherever they choose, that gender is 'fluid" and has nothing to do with a child's biological sex, and that abortion is a basic right that should be unapologetically promoted."
More liberal secular organizations including the Texas Freedom Network and the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States (SIECUS) do, in fact, promote comprehensive sex education
that goes beyond urging abstinence and includes medically accurate "instruction on contraception and STI prevention, reproductive health care, sexual orientation and gender identity, and consent and sexual violence prevention." These organizations argue that public policy must recognize that over 60 percent of Texas high school students are sexually active and information should be provided to reduce teen pregnancy in a state where the teen birthrate ranks among the top ten states in the nation. Likewise, the state should provide information to help stem sexually transmitted infection rates, which are also among the highest in the nation. Meanwhile, public policy should create an environment that is free from sexual assault and secure for LGBTQ students, a majority of whom feel unsafe.10
Thinking about the Role of Elites in Texas Politics
Interest groups actively attempt to shape public policy affecting every aspect of people's lives. Interest groups that seek to influence economic policies such as taxing, spending, and business regulation are seeking policies that are amenable to compromise; for example, groups seeking to raise the minimum wage to $15 per hour might be persuaded to accept $14. It is much more difficult to persuade groups to compromise when their most fundamental cultural values and personal identities are at stake in the policy-making process as they are for conservative religious and gun-rights groups or liberal reproductive-freedom, civil- rights, or LGBTQ advocates.
CTO
Explain how these views differ as to the purpose of sex education. Is it possible to reconcile the views of these interest groups?
CTO
Reflect on how educational policy making can lead to deep cultural conflict and a polarized political environment.
equirements that students learn the concept of “responsibility for the common
good” (which one board member described as “communistic”) have been removed from the curriculum. Students will learn that the United States is a “constitutional republic” rather than a “democratic society” and that the “separation of church and state” is not in the Constitution. Meanwhile, students are taught that Senator Joseph McCarthy’s anticommunist crusade in the 1950s may have been justified. Confederate President Jefferson Davis’s inaugural address is taught alongside Abraham Lincoln’s speeches, and the role of slavery as a cause of the Civil War is downplayed. These elements of the “Lost Cause” narrative about the Civil War have not been eliminated from the curriculum. The curriculum standards emphasize the biblical and Judeo-Christian influences on the Founding Fathers and the benefits of free enterprise, which is mentioned more than 80 times in the curriculum requirements.
Faculties Although the state board for educator certification establishes standards for qualification, conduct, and certification of public school teachers, actual hiring of teachers is a local matter. Most districts do not follow a publicly announced policy of hiring or dismiss-ing teachers because of their political viewpoints, but in many districts, teachers are carefully screened for their attitudes. Salary and working conditions are perpetual issues of dissatisfaction among teachers
because they affect morale and recruitment even as increasing public demands for account-ability have added reporting and other paperwork to teachers’ workloads beyond the standard expectations for lesson planning, grading, and communicating with parents. Expected income is certainly a factor when people choose their careers, and education
simply does not compare favorably among the professions. Texas teachers earn even less than public school teachers in many states. For the 2020–21 school year, the National Education Association, the nation’s largest teachers’ union, estimated that Texas classroom teachers’ average salary of $57,641 was 12 percent less than the national average.11
And, although the
Texas Legislature has recently raised teacher salaries, they are still about $8,000 below the national average. Another issue for teachers has been the use of high-stakes testing such as the STAAR test. Teachers’ groups have objected to the use of these test results in retention, promotion, and salary decisions on the grounds that they do not accurately measure the full range of teachers’ con-tributions to student knowledge and that their use causes faculty to teach to the test while ignoring other valuable skills and knowledge that are not included in standard-ized tests. Some parent groups have joined teachers in objecting to the frequency of such tests, and many conservatives oppose any national-level testing at all.
Did You Know? According to one estimate, school teachers earn 23.5 percent less than similarly educated and experienced professionals.12
351
Students Public schools have changed considerably in recent years. The number of stu-dents attending Texas public schools has been growing at a rate of approximately 1.6 percent per year, and that growth is expected to continue for the next decade. Texas students are increasingly from low-income backgrounds (60 percent are economically disadvantaged) and are also becoming more ethnically diverse—53 percent Latino, 27 percent Anglo, 13 percent African American, and 5 percent Asian American.13 This changing student population seems to present a challenge to public schools because a significant difference remains between the performance of Anglo students and that of Africa
Americans and Latinos. Scores on the standard state performance tests like STAAR indicate that the gap is closing, but Anglos’ passing rate is still higher than that of African Americans or Latinos.
Public School Finance In 2020, Texas schools spent $10,342 per student—23 per-cent less than the national average.14
The actual distribution of these funds is governed
according to extremely complex rules and mathematical formulas that occupy six chapters totaling more than 75,000 words in the Texas Education Code. Although public school accountants and financial officers must understand the nuances of these rules to maximize funding for their respective districts, one needs to understand only the system’s most basic features to engage intelligently in the public debate that surrounds public school finance. Three elements make up public school funding: federal (8 percent), state (39 percent), and local (53 percent).15
Federal funding makes up a fairly small share of the cost
Did You Know? In 2020, Texas spent less per public-school student than 39 other states.16
of public education in Texas. Most federal funding pays for ongoing aid programs for child nutrition and special-needs, military, and low-income students. State funding comes from a variety of sources. The Per-manent School Fund, established in 1876, invests receipts of rentals, sales, and mineral royalties from Texas’s public lands.
Only the interest and dividends from this permanent endowment may be spent. Earnings from the Permanent School Fund and one-fourth of the motor fuels tax make up the Avail-able School Fund, some of which is used for instructional supplies such as textbooks, and the remainder is distributed to local school districts. The Foundation School Program (FSP) accounts for the largest portion of state and local
funding by far. State funds from general revenues, lottery proceeds, and other funds are dis-tributed to districts according to formulas based on district and student characteristics. The FSP is structured as a state–local partnership to bring some financial equality to local districts despite vast differences in local tax resources. Local funding comes primarily from ad valorem property taxes. The county appraisal
authority determines the market value of property for all local governments within the county, and local district boards then set the property tax rate stated as an amount per $100 of prop-erty value. Local school boards may set the property tax rate up to $1.06 per $100 valuation for maintenance and operations and an additional $0.50 per $100 for construction, capital improvements, and debt service. Thus, the Texas school system depends largely on local property tax revenues for opera-tion costs and almost entirely on them for buildings and capital improvements. Historically, this dependence on property taxes has created gross inequality among school districts, some of which contain very valuable commercial real estate and expensive homes even while other districts are property poor. In 1987, the state’s wealthiest school districts had 700 times the property wealth per student of the poorest. As a result, the Texas Supreme Court ruled in the precedent-setting case Edgewood ISD v. Kirby that the school finance system violates the state constitutional requirement that the state provide for an efficient system of public free schools. After decades of struggle, reform, and litigation, the Texas Supreme Court in 2016 finally upheld the current finance system despite the remaining gap between districts in property-rich and property-poor areas.17 Today, the state guarantees that a district setting a minimum tax rate of 89 cents per
$100 of property valuation will get a minimum allotment of at least $6,160 regardless of the value of the property within its boundaries. To assure that districts will maintain an
adequate tax effort, the state also supplements with state funds to ensure that, up to a point, each $.01 per $100 property valuation will yield a guaranteed amount regardless of prop-erty tax base. Although the system of basic allotments and guaranteed yields is designed to provide some financial equity among local school districts, local revenues from property taxes vary so much that the state has also been forced to establish requirements that some richer districts share their local revenue with poorer ones, a system that critics describe as a “Robin Hood” plan.
Public-School Policy Outcomes Among the Fifty States All of the political struggle and legal action over equalization of school finances begs the question of whether spending more money on public schools actually enhances student achievement. It is well known that Texas state and local governments spend far less per pupil and that the state’s public-school teachers earn considerably less than the national average, but financial resources are not the only determinants of educational success. For example, the cost of education varies from state to state and various other factors affect student outcomes. The number of students from financially disadvantaged families, family educational and cultural characteristics, the health and special needs of students, language barriers, effectiveness of teachers, and many more factors affect educational policy outcomes. Table 12.3 compares student outcomes of Texas students with those of all fifty states according to important standard measures of student achievement. Compared to other states, Texas student performance is mixed. Texas schools achieve an
outstanding retention rate with only 10 percent of students officially dropping out of school between the ninth grade and graduation. Fourth-graders score well in math, but reading scores are significantly below the national average. Texans’ Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores are poor compared to other states, though this measure is based on which students choose to take the test and cannot be taken as a comprehensive measure of students’ college readiness among the fifty states
School Privatization Some reformers have supported improving educational out- comes with voucher plans that would use public funds to enable students to attend private schools. Supporters, often including conservatives and particular religious groups, argue that voucher plans should offer lower-income parents the choice to transfer their children our of underperforming public schools, an alternative now available only to wealthier families. They believe that increasing competition between public and private schools should stimulate improvements in public education.
Opponents, including teachers' organizations and parents in prosperous suburban schools. argue that private schools are not required to meet the same standards as public schools; they are not required to hire certified teachers or meet standard testing requirements. Instead, some private schools achieve their reputations by selectively admitting top-performing students even as they drain essential financial resources away from public schools. Many rural legislators fear that vouchers would threaten local public schools that have traditionally been the center of small-town community life. Opponents argue that the state should not subsidize special privileges and point to research indicating that similar students perform as well in public schools as they do in similar private schools.
Short of vouchers for students to attend private schools, several programs offer school choice and foster competitiveness within the public school system. Students in failing schools may transfer to other schools within the public system, and local school districts have established successful magnet schools with attractive special programs. Meanwhile, public charter schools offer some students alternatives to traditional schools, and many reformers support making them available to even more students.
Higher Education
Like public schools, higher education is a major state service, accounting for 10 percent of state expenditure during the 2022-23 budget period. Public institutions enroll 90 percent of all students in Texas higher education. Texas public institutions of higher education include thirty-seven general academic institutions and universities and eighty-two public 2-year institu- tions including community colleges.
Administration of Colleges and Universities The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB) was established to coordinate the complex system of higher education. Its nine members are appointed by the governor, with the consent of the senate, and serve for 6-year terms. The Coordinating Board appoints the commissioner of higher education to supervise its staff. Together, the board and staff gather data and collaborate with public colleges and universities as they plan future needs for programs, curricula, and physical plants. Because Texas's colleges and universities were not established systematically, the Coordinating Board cannot impose a rational, coherent system on their existing operations. Politically powerful boards of regents complicate the Coordinating Board's efforts as they compete to impose their views on higher education, as do other groups.
Boards of regents or trustees set basic policies for their institutions, within the limits of state
law and considering the guidelines established by the Coordinating Board. Governing boards
provide for the selection of public university administrators, including system-wide administra
tors (chancellors), campus presidents, deans, and other officers. Certain boards govern general
academic institutions located on several campuses:
The University of Texas System includes The University of Texas at Austin and other campuses at Arlington, Dallas, El Paso, the Permian Basin, the Rio Grande Valley, San Antonio, Tyler, and, most recently Stephen F. Austin University in Nacogdoches.
• The Texas A&M University System has its main campus at College Station with additional campuses at Central Texas, Corpus Christi, Commerce, Galveston, Kingsville, San Antonio, and Texarkana, along with Prairie View A&M University, Tarleton State University, West Texas A&M University, and Texas A&M International University.
• The Texas State University System includes Lamar University, Sam Houston State University, Sul Ross State University, and Texas State University, many of which operate on multiple campuses.
The University of Houston System includes its main campus in southeast Houston as
well as the University of Houston-Downtown, University of Houston-Clear Lake, and
University of Houston-Victoria.
⚫ The Texas Tech University System includes the main campus at Lubbock, Angelo State University, and Midwestern State University.
• The University of North Texas System includes the main campus in Denton and a second campus in Dallas.
• The Texas Woman's University System includes the main campus in Denton and health sciences campuses in Dallas and in Houston.
⚫ Texas Southern University in Houston is today the only Texas university that is not part of a university system.
Authorized and financed partly by the state, public community colleges are also gener- ally supervised by the Coordinating Board. However, unlike 4-year institutions, which are usually designed to attract students from larger regions of the state and nation as well as international students, voters establish community colleges in one or more school districts primarily to serve area residents. They are usually governed by independently elected boards.
Historically known as junior colleges, the traditional role of 2-year institutions was to serve freshmen and sophomores by offering academic courses for credits transferable to senior colleges. Although most of their students are enrolled in these transferable academic courses, 2-year colleges have now responded to the demands resulting from economic diversification by adopting a community college approach, based on open admissions, maximizing accessibility, and incorporating technical, compensatory, and continuing education among the traditional academic course offerings. The curriculum, low cost, and geographic and financial accessibility of community colleges have resulted in increasing enrollments, especially in academic programs. Figure 12.6 shows that a majority of Texas public higher-education students enroll in 2-year institutions.
The Politics of Higher Education
It is difficult to measure objectively many of the benefits of higher education, such as personal satisfaction and contribution to society. Individual financial benefits, how- ever, are very clear, contrary to critics' allegations that higher education is not worth increasing tuition costs. Those with bachelor's degrees earn approximately $1,200,000 more in median lifetime earnings than high school graduates and those with professional degrees earn $3,100,000 more." Those with college degrees also have a much lower risk
of unemployment.
Despite these obvious benefits, legislative bodies and boards of regents and trustees have
demanded increasing accountability for results in institutions of higher education as well as
from their administrators and faculty. Yet there are no generally agreed-upon answers to the
questions raised about higher education: What should its goals be? How should it measure
success in achieving those goals? To whom should it be accountable? We examine some issues
concerning higher education in the remainder of this section.
Faculty Issues Salaries have been a perpetual issue when Texas institutions of higher education recruit new faculty, but full-time public college and university faculty salaries have now risen slightly above the nationwide median. However, academic freedom remains an issue as college and university administrators have long sought to dilute job protection guarantees for professors. State law requires governing boards to adopt procedures for periodic reevalua-tion of all tenured faculty. Faculties generally fear that such policies can be a threat to academic freedom and a tool for persecution by administrators.
Financial Issues Financing higher education is a continuing issue. Like elemen-tary and secondary schools, most colleges and universities in Texas must struggle with relatively small budgets. Meanwhile, increasing college enrollments and demands for specialized, high-cost programs are increasing at a time when social services, health care, and other services are also placing more demands on scarce state revenues. Under politi-cal pressure from conservatives to cut state taxes, Texas’s legislature has been reluctant to raise revenues to cover the increasing cost of higher education and has shifted much of the cost burden to students instead.
Student Accessibility Proposals to cope with financial pressures include closing institutions with smaller enrollments, reducing duplication, restricting student services, increasing tuition, and delaying construction plans or implementation of new degree programs. Most of these policies have the effect of limiting student access to higher education, in as much as increasing costs present a major obstacle to obtaining a college education for most students. Because the Texas Legislature deregulated tuition, college and university boards have dealt
with increasing costs by raising tuition, mandatory student fees, and residence costs. Between 2003 and 2020, average tuition and fees for full-time students at Texas public universities doubled to $9,844 per year and, at community colleges, they increased to $2,772 per year for full-time students.22
Financial accessibility of higher education is a growing concern in all states, especially because the size of Federal Pell Grants and other forms of financial aid
Figure 12.7 Tuitions and Fees at Public Colleges and Universities Compared Among the Fifty States, 2022–23 These figures compare student tuition and fees for full-time students at public colleges and universities. Among 4-year institutions, Texas in-state tuition and fees are slightly above the national average and the twenty-first highest; however, Texas community college in-district tuition and fees are considerably below the national average and rank fifth lowes
are not keeping pace with increasing costs, and students are financing more of the increased cost of higher education by borrowing. Upon graduation from public 4-year institutions, 56 percent of Texas students have debt that averages $25,101, while 29 percent of community college graduates have debt that averages $15,625. Nevertheless, the problem of student accessibility is not as
intractable as in many other states. Figure 12.7 on page 357 shows that the tuition at Texas public higher education, espe-cially community colleges, compares quite favorably among the 50 state

Student Diversity In addition to affordability, other cultural, structural, and historical factors have limited access to certain populations that have traditionally been underserved by Texas institutions of higher learning. Economically disadvantaged people, those who live in rural areas, and ethnic or racial minorities have been notably underrep- resented in colleges and universities. Women are actually overrepresented in the student population at large, but very much underrepresented in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Institutions of higher education have struggled with underrepresented minority student recruitment and have adopted positive efforts to increase diversity and offer more access to these underserved populations. Sometimes affirmative action efforts are limited to positive recruitment drives among target groups, but such programs have sometimes also included ethnicity, race or gender as part of the admissions criteria. Supporters of affirmative action argue that ethnic, racial, and economic diversity encour
ages lively classroom discussions from multiple perspectives, fosters cross-racial harmony, and cultivates leaders among groups that have traditionally been at a disadvantage in society. Most opponents direct their arguments against those few affirmative action programs that use race-conscious criteria to select student applicants, contending that such policies can lead to reverse discrimination against Anglos and Asian Americans as they are passed over in favor of less qualified underrepresented minority applicants.
Texas established a fairly noncontroversial form of affirmative action after the U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals struck down admissions criteria at The University of Texas School of Law. Texas responded with a state law that broadens student admissions without using gender or ethnicity directly in admissions criteria. General academic institutions must auto- matically admit students from the top 10 percent of high school graduating classes regardless of test scores.
Because various school districts serve very different populations, granting automatic admis- sion to the top 10 percent from each graduating class ensures that public universities draw from a diverse pool of applicants. The result has been that far more female. African American, Latino, low-income, and rural students have been admitted to state universities under the "10 percent rule" than under traditional admission criteria (see Image 12.2) and some analysts have held the program out as a model for other states.
However, the rule resulted in a flood of entering freshmen at prestige flagship campuses, and Texas law was later changed to allow the University of Texas at Austin to cap the number sat of entering freshmen admitted under the "10 percent" rule (e.g., only the top 6 percent in each high school class will earn automatic admission), and the university administrators sought diversity and inclusion by instead using criteria that included race and ethnicity among many other factors. The U.S. Supreme Court decisions had previously allowed race
to be considered directly in college admissions policies under very limited circumstances,25 admission policies.26
359 and it had upheld the university’s
In 2023, however, the U.S. Supreme Court It held that race-conscious
reversed previous rulings that had allowed limited consideration of race and ethnicity in admissions.27
admissions policies violate both the U.S. Constitution and federal civil rights statutes. As a result, the University of Texas at Austin's affirmative action program is likely illegal, and aside from the UT campus at Austin, the “10 percent” rule remains Texas’s primary policy to achieve diversity and inclusion.
Student Retention Of course, admission to institu-tions of higher learning is hardly the only measure of success. Although students may benefit from even a short experience in college and some employers consider it in hiring, graduation or completion of occupational curriculum programs is society’s respected measure of success. Unfortunately, high costs, lack of course availability, inad-equate academic preparation, and personal factors all con-tribute to the problem of student retention. Among full-time students at 4-year public universities, 26 percent graduate within 4 years and 53 percent receive degrees within 6 years. Community colleges face an even more difficult challenge retaining and graduating students—of those seeking a degree, 32 percent earn a postsecondary degree or certificate within 6 years.28 Texas institutions of higher education are moving toward
Image 12.2 Historically underserved students graduate from Texas State University. At community colleges, 45 percent of those receiving degrees or certificates are Latinos, 32 percent are Anglos, and 12 percent are African American. Among public 4-year universities, 40 percent of graduates are Anglos, 31 percent Latinos, and 11 percent African Americans. However, the flagship campus of Texas A&M and UT at Austin are far less representative of the Texas population.
policies incentivizing timely degree completion, limiting the number of courses that students may drop, and counseling students to enroll primarily in courses that are part of their degree programs. Powerful political forces in the business community, including the Texas Association of Business and the Texas Public Policy Foundation, are pressing the legislature to change funding formulas to reward Texas colleges and universities that have higher gradu-ation rates.
Quality However, even graduation rates do not fully measure the success of institutions of higher learning. Measuring the success of Texas colleges and universities must take into account their two major functions: (1) teaching—that is, imparting existing knowledge to students—and (2) research—that is, creating new knowledge. Various rankings show that the University of
Texas (UT) and Texas A&M flagship campuses are the two most recognized public institutions of higher learning in the state. Perhaps their rankings partly reflect the resources available to these institutions. General legislative appropriations have been relatively more generous for the UT and Texas A&M flagship campuses, and the state constitution earmarks revenues from more than 2 million acres of public land to the Permanent University Fund for the benefit of the UT and Texas A&M systems
Texas also established a National Research University Fund that is designed to enable emerg- ing research universities to achieve national prominence. Texas Tech University, the University of Houston, the University of Texas at Arlington, the University of Texas at San Antonio, and the University of Texas at Dallas have met the criteria to access these funds as Tier 1 universities. Several other Texas universities are attempting to qualify as well, but the long-term results of their efforts cannot be fully foreseen or evaluated.
Health and Human Services
LO 12.4 Analyze Texas health and human service policies and the politics of income redistribution.
The second most costly category of state spending can be broadly classified as health and human services, which encompass public assistance, Medicaid for the poor, and a variety of other programs. In the 2022-23 budget period, these programs cost $87 billion (33 percent of the state's total budget). However, about 60 percent of this funding originates as grants-in-aid from the federal government."
The Texas Health and Human Services Commission (HHSC) provides a variety of social services, including Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, Medicaid, and the Children's Health Insurance Program. The commission also provides behavioral health services, man- ages state hospitals, provides long-term care for people with disabilities, and licenses nursing homes as well as child-care providers.
Health Programs
In the United States, the federal government began to provide hospital care to the Merchant Marines as early as 1798 and government involvement in health care has grown and evolved dramatically since. Today, health care has become an immense public-private partnership and, after education, is the second most expensive service that Texas provides.
Opponents of government's assuming responsibility for public health describe it as "social- ized medicine." Strictly defined, socialized medicine is a health care system in which the government hires medical practitioners who work at government-owned facilities to directly provide health care, as in Great Britain and in U.S. veterans' and military hospitals. However, the term is often loosely applied to health care systems in which the government provides health care insurance, such as Medicare or Medicaid, even though benefit payments are actually made to private health care providers.
The state has various levels of involvement in health care. In some instances, the state is the provider of direct health services for certain special populations. In other instances, the state is the payer but not the provider-acting as a public health insurer, as it does with Medicaid by paying for medical services offered by private practitioners. The state also acts as a regulator and buyer of private health insurance.
Direct Health Services The state provides personal health services for special populations, operating infectious disease centers and psychiatric hospitals and funding local mental health community centers and chemical dependency programs. At the local level, county hospitals and clinics are legally responsible for providing medical care for uninsured indigents and have thus become the health care providers of last resort. County hospitals are usually operated by county hospital districts that have the authority to col- lect property taxes that partially fund their operations. Several government institutions also manage teaching hospitals that provide care to both patients with and without the
ability to pay for the care.
nstead of using county-funded hospitals and clinics,
many uninsured and indigent patients obtain medical services through private hospital emergency rooms because federal and state laws require them to accept emergency patients regardless of their ability to pay. The cost of such treatment is often uncompensated and passed on to paying patients and insurance companies—a practice partially responsible for rapidly rising health insurance premiums.
State Health Insurance Programs Texas operates two major health insurance programs for those who qualify. Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) are insurance programs designed to provide a minimal level of care for qualified low-income individuals and families who have enrolled. Although these programs are administered by the state, they are largely funded by federal grants-in-aid. Texas spends over one-fourth of its state budget on the
Medicaid program, but over 60 percent of these Medic-aid funds come from the federal government in the form of grants-in-aid. Medicaid covers a wide variety of health services that are generally provided through managed care (HMO-type) plans under contract with the state. Medicaid should not be confused with Medica

which is a federal program available to most persons 65
years of age and older regardless of income and is administered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In contrast, the Medicaid program is administered by the state and is available only to those who meet certain age and income requirements. These groups include low-income children along with their parents and caretakers, preg- nant women, people age 65 and older, and those with disabilities. Income requirements for Medicaid eligibility are determined by a complex formula based on age, disability, and pregnancy status. CHIP also helps insure children of low-income parents who are not eligible for Medicaid, yet 930,000 Texas children under age 19 remain completely uninsured."
Private Health Insurance Although approximately 30 percent of Texans have some sort of public insurance coverage such as Medicare, Medicaid, or CHIP, most others rely on private insurance companies to pay for their medical expenses. Table 12.4 shows that employer-sponsored plans cover 46 percent of Texans and other private policies cover another 6 percent.
The Uninsured More than one in six Texans has no health insurance coverage. Among the states, Texas has the nation's highest percentage of uninsured residents. Although Texas employers are almost as likely to provide health insurance for their workers as are employers in other states, fewer Texans have public health insurance than in other states. Texas has a large undocumented immigrant population ineligible for public insurance, and is one of only eleven states that has resisted expanding Medicaid benefits available under the Affordable Care Act, also known as "Obamacare."

Table 12.4 Texas Compared to the Nation: How People Get Health Insurance This table shows how people get their primary insurance. It shows most Texans have employer-sponsored medical insurance (46%), and despite public insurance, one in six Texans have no health insurance at all—a larger percentage than in any other state
Health Care Reform In 2010, Congress passed comprehensive health care reforms known as the Affordable Care Act (ACA), designed to expand Medicaid coverage, to limit objectionable insurance company practices, and to make subsidized health insurance available to businesses and individuals through competitive insurance marketplaces.
The ACA provides federal funds to pay for at least 90 percent of the costs for states that expand Medicaid eligibility to all legal residents with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. Before passage of the ACA, Medicaid was available primarily for children, the disabled, and the elderly; adults earning more than the poverty level were generally ineligible in many states, including Texas.
The ACA also ended some of the most unpopular insurance company practices. Health insurance companies can no longer arbitrarily drop beneficiaries when they get sick or because they have reached lifetime limits. Insurance companies must allow parents to keep their chil- dren covered under their family policies until age 26 and may not deny insurance to people with preexisting conditions.
To make it possible for insurance companies to meet these requirements, insurance com- panies must be able to spread risk among a larger pool of insured persons. As a result, the federal law established mandates requiring that larger businesses buy health insurance or pay a tax penalty. And to make insurance affordable, the federal government provides tax credits to subsidize premiums on a sliding scale based on income up to four times the federal poverty level. People may sign up for qualified insurance plans directly through insurance companies or through state-run or federally operated marketplaces that provide side-by-side comparisons of private insurance offerings in their state.
Health Care Politics
Passage of the ACA exposed a deep cleavage in public opinion about health care policies. Conservative critics argued that "Obamacare" is a federal overreach and that it places govern- ment in the middle of health care decisions that are better left to the market and to private individuals. When Texas and other conservative states challenged the ACA in court, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld most of the health care reform law," but it also found that states could not be required to accept funds to expand Medicaid. Despite the availability of federal funds for at least 90 percent of its cost, Texas, along with several other states, exercised its option to reject Medicaid expansion.
edicaid expansion under the ACA partially explains why the state has the largest number of uninsured persons of any state and almost a quarter of all Texans ages 19-64 are uninsured. Medicaid expansion could cover an additional 1.7 million persons.
Income Support Programs Although health care services are by far the most expen-sive of the social services the state provides, income support programs are probably more controversial because they pro-vide cash directly to beneficiaries. Although the amounts are relatively small, taxpayer funds are directly transferred or redistributed to recipients based on their need or lack of employment. Supporters often refer to these programs as safety net programs.
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families Among social service programs, Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) is designed for children whose parents are incapable of providing for their children’s basic needs. More than two-thirds of TANF recipients are children who are deprived of support because of the absence, unemployment, o
disability of one or both parents and whose family income is less than 12 percent of the poverty level. Adult caretakers of such children are eligible for small grants, but unless they are disabled or needed at home to care for very young children; adult TANF and food stamp recipients are referred for employment counseling, assessment, and job placement.
Federal and state regulations now require recipients to cooperate in identifying an absent parent and, with few exceptions, limit TANF benefits to citizens; adult eligibility is usually limited to 2 years at a time, with a maximum 5-year lifetime benefit. By making welfare less of an entitlement, these welfare policies are intended to force able-bodied individuals our of dependency and into productive work. Some federal funds are now distributed as block grants to the states to allow them flexibility to develop support services, child care, job train- ing and placement, and rehabilitation programs to help welfare recipients in finding work. These reforms have substantially reduced the number of basic TANF recipients in Texas, only 18,000 Texans were receiving this aid by mid-2022, and 86 percent of them were children." The maximum TANF grant has been reduced, and the average TANF family receives $191 per month. The Texas median TANF grant is less than half the national median. Today, Texas spends about 0.1 percent of its budget on this income assistance program for which a small percentage of the poor qualify.
Unemployment Insurance Whereas TANF is designed as an income supplement for the poor and is administered by the Health and Human Services Commission, unemploy ment insurance is designed to provide a partial income replacement for those who have lost their jobs. Unlike TANF, which is a welfare program based on need, unemployment insurance is a social insurance program financed with taxes paid by employers, and eligibility is deter- mined by previous earnings rather than need or family size.
Created in 1935 as a partnership between the states and the national government, unemployment benefits are financed from state taxes on employers, but some adminis- trative costs are paid with federal funds. The Texas unemployment insurance program is
administered by the Texas Workforce Commission (TWC), which provides benefit pay- ments for a maximum of 26 weeks with benefits amounting to about 27 percent of the wages the recipient had been paid while working. In the past, Congress has sometimes extended the period of eligibility during periods of severe recessions when jobs were scarce and it once again temporarily increased eligibility and payments during the COVID-19 pandemic in both 2020 and 2021.
Under Texas's rather restrictive laws, a worker must register for job placement with the TWC and is usually ineligible to receive benefits (at least for a time) if he or she voluntarily quit or was fired for cause. Because the rate at which employers are taxed is based on claims made by former employees, employers have an interest in contesting employee claims. For these reasons and others, only one-third of unemployed Texans actually receive benefits.
Handling unemployment insurance claims is only one priority for the TWC; its major functions include providing a workforce for employers, gathering employment statistics, enforcing child labor laws, and providing various special job training and rehabilitation services. Able-bodied welfare recipients are referred to the TWC for training and child- care services.
The Politics of Welfare and Income Redistribution
Social service programs are among a wide range of public policies that employ mechanisms for income redistribution-public taxation, spending, and regulatory policies intended to shift income from one class of recipients to another. Some redistributive programs, like regres sive taxation, business subsidies, and certain government contracting policies, shift income upward from lower- and middle-income families to high-income earners; others, like unem- ployment compensation, TANF, Medicaid, and food stamps, primarily benefit lower-income persons. Different views about these kinds of programs drive much of the ideological conflict between liberals and conservatives in Texas.
Defining Welfare So many public policies redistribute income among various groups that the very concept of welfare has no uniformly recognized definition. The broadest view is that welfare is any unearned, government-provided benefit. Governments provide direct sub- sidies to businesses and corporations that far exceed TANF and food stamp costs combined. Such corporate welfare includes financial bailouts, most subsidies to agribusiness, and grants
to the defense industry to sell weapons to foreign governments. Programs that primarily benefit the middle class, such as federal income tax deductions for mortgage interest, are also more costly than poverty programs. Because these programs are supported by powerful special interests or large numbers of middle-class voters, they are relatively secure from serious political threat.
More often, the term welfare is used more narrowly to refer to controversial programs explicitly
designed to assist low-income people. Accordingly, old age, survivors', and disability insurance
(commonly referred to as Social Security), as well as unemployment insurance, are social insurance
programs, not public welfare programs. Eligibility for social insurance programs is based not on
need alone that is, eligibility is not based on a means test-but on the tax paid by beneficiaries
and their employers. In this respect, they are like private insurance programs, differing primarily
in that they are operated by the government and are compulsory for most employers and employees.
Such programs are not aimed directly at low-income persons. In fact, many persons now receive
public assistance for the very reason that they were ineligible to participate in adequate social
insurance programs. More myths and misunderstandings have developed about antipoverty
programs than probably any other public service.
Welfare Myths There is a mistaken impression that any poor person may be eligible for state cash assistance benefits. Although more than 4 million Texans live in poverty, far less than 1 percent of them receive monthly TANF aid, and the only able-bodied adults now receiving income assistance are sole caregivers of young dependent children. The state provides no general program of cash assistance for able-bodied adults without
children, even though they may be in need. Instead, federal programs such as the Supplemen-tal Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP, popularly known as food stamps) and Medicaid are available to most who fall below the federally defined poverty level, while federal Supple-mental Security Income (SSI) may be available to the aged, blind, and disabled. Contrary to popular myth, few new Lexus drivers are legally on Texas welfare rolls because
benefits furnish less than the bare essentials of life. Nor does it seem likely, as some critics suggest, that mothers have more children just to increase their monthly TANF checks. The maximum monthly TANF grant is $327 per three-person family; even when these payments are combined with food stamps and Medicaid, the average TANF child still lives in a home with resources considerably below the poverty level. Several reasons explain the myths that have grown around public welfare. Because welfare
benefits people according to their needs rather than according to their efforts, it seems to vio-late the widespread American attitude that everyone ought to be paid according to the work one does. Consequently, even the lowest wage earner often feels superior to the welfare recipi-ent. Most Texans prefer to identify themselves with the economically secure rather than with the economically marginalized. There is also prejudice against some groups that benefit from welfare because a disproportionate number of welfare recipients are single parents or members of ethnic and racial minority groups. Whatever the cause, these myths and prejudices remain major elements in the debate over public assistance.
Welfare Realities Public welfare faces serious substantive questions. Cheating and overpayment cost taxpayers money and dilute the limited resources that would otherwise be available for those in genuine need. Although Texas’s Lone Star Card was developed as a form of positive identification to reduce fraud, it is difficult to determine the amount of cheating that occurs during the application and qualification processes. Probably the most serious problem for the welfare system today is that it alleviates rather
than cures. Most public assistance programs are designed only to relieve the most severe pains of poverty, not to cure the problem. Welfare or other assistance programs may prevent starva-tion, but they offer no assurance that recipients will someday escape poverty and dependence. The vast majority of Texas welfare recipients are children, who are too young to do much about their problems. But chronic poverty remains a systemic problem that affects both the individual and society at large.
The Causes of Poverty Those who support social service programs usually look at the problem of poverty as a systemic social problem largely beyond the control of individuals. They point to lack of job availability, poor neighborhood schools, racial or gender discrimina-tion, and the concentration of wealth as causes of poverty. They argue that an environment of poverty disrupts family life, promotes emotional and physical disease, and denies young people role models to help them become fully participating members of society; the best single predictor of poverty is being born into a low-income family. Critics of antipoverty programs often view poverty as an individual rather than a
social problem, arguing that those living in poverty suffer their fate because of defects of character or problems of their own making. They argue that long-term poverty results from individual choices to drop out of school at an early age or their failure to develop
kills necessary to earn a living wage. Those who live in poverty may exhibit varying degrees of despair, alienation, hopelessness, emotional insecurity, or lethargy, and many have failed to form stable family relationships. As a result, some impoverished persons may lack a feeling that they can do much about their problem; others may lack a sense of responsibility for their own fate.
Transportation
LO 12.5 Analyze Texas transportation policies and the prospects for reform.
Road building and transportation have been a government function since ancient times and, representing 11 percent of the state budget, it remains one of the three most expensive state functions in Texas today. A relatively small share of state funding is directed to mass public transportation; the lion’s share of Texas’s transportation spending is for highway construction and maintenance.
Highway Programs In Texas’s early days, road construction was primarily the responsibility of the county. Most Texas counties still maintain a property tax dedicated to the construction and maintenance of roads, and in rural areas, road building remains a major function of county government. But their efforts are too small and too poorly financed to provide the expensive, coordinated statewide network of roads needed by highly mobile Texans in the modern world. In 1916, the national government encouraged state governments to assume the major
responsibility for highway construction and maintenance. The 1916 Federal Aid Road Act made available federal funds to cover one-half of the construction costs for state highways. To become eligible for those funds, a state was required to establish an agency to develop a coor-dinated plan for the state highway system and to administer construction and maintenance programs. Texas responded by establishing the Texas Highway Department, now known as the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT). The department is supervised by a five-member commission, which appoints an executive director who oversees the department and supervises the work of regional district offices. Newer federal aid programs and increased funding for existing ones have expanded
TxDOT’s responsibilities. The earliest highway-building program was designed to pro-vide only major highways along primary routes. Federal funding later became available for secondary roads, and Texas established the farm-to-market (FM) program to assume state maintenance of many county roads as the rural road network was paved, extended, and improved. Finally, beginning in 1956, Congress made funds available for 90 percent of the cost of construction of express, limited-access highways to connect major cities in the United States. Altogether the 80,000-mile state highway system carries about three-fourths of Texas’s motor vehicle traffic.
The Politics of Transportation Highway contractors and a variety of allied groups lobbied for the establishment of the state highway fund and for increases in highway spending, and they attempt to guard it against those who would spend any part of it for other purposes. Despite their efforts, per capita state highway funding fell far below the national average and has only recently begun to recover.
Highway Funding Funding for the highway program is a joint federal–state responsibility. The federal government, mostly from the federal gasoline tax, provides one-third of the transportation department’s revenues. This large federal contribution has allowed the national government to demand such restrictions as meeting clean air standards and setting a minimum drinking age of 21 as conditions for receiving federal aid. State monies account for about two-thirds of TxDOT
funding. The state highway fund has been mostly sup-ported by motor vehicle registration (license plate) fees and the 20-cent-per-gallon motor fuel tax. Because Texas spends more money maintaining existing highways than it does con-structing new ones, the state has been forced to look to alter-native revenue sources to pay for new highway construction to accommodate the population’s transportation needs in one of the fastest-growing states in the nation. At the urging of the transportation industry, Texas recently amended the state constitution to direct a portion of the oil and gas severance taxes and motor vehicle sales taxes to highway construction, and the state has used tolls to fund new highways. Texas has also experimented with privatization as a way to fund new highway construction
Highway Privatization TxDOT planned to use comprehensive development agreements with private entities to develop a highly ambitious and controversial 50-year program to supplement existing highways. The $200 billion, 4,000-mile Trans-Texas Corridor would have included superhighways (with separate freight and commuter lanes), railways (with high-speed, commuter, and freight lines), and utility corridors (for water, electricity, natural gas, petroleum, fiber-optic telecommunications, and broadband lines). Funded by both state taxes and private investment, the project was to be operated largely by private enterprises such as toll companies. Facing stiff opposition from property rights groups that objected to the use of eminent
domain to enable such a massive state takeover of private land to benefit private inves-tors, TxDOT abandoned the expansive Trans-Texas Corridor plan in favor of smaller, more localized projects, but it has not yet completely given up on the concept of highway privatization or the use of tolls to fund new highway construction. The future of high-way funding remains a tough political problem for the Texas Legislature and the state’s political leadership.
mass transit
Mass Transit Texans, like most Americans, remain unreceptive to mass transit as an alternative to individual motor vehicles. Mass transit refers to transportation systems that carry multiple passengers, such as train and bus systems; whether publicly or privately owned, mass transit systems are available to the general public and usually charge a fare. Only 3 to 4 percent of Texans in metropolitan areas regularly commute to work by urban mass transit. By contrast, mass transportation is a popular, viable alternative to personal vehicles in the northeastern United States, where one-third of residents in metropolitan areas use mass transit to commute to work.3
Automotive transportation is close to the hearts of Texans, and no other mode of transpor- tation seems as convenient because no other is as individualized. Buses and trains cannot take individuals exactly where they want to go exactly when they want to go there. Automobiles have become a way of life, and their manufacture, maintenance, and fueling have become dominant elements of the economy.
TxDOT spends less than 1 percent of its budget on mass transit. Instead, most of the effort in mass transportation is sponsored by local metropolitan governments. As we mentioned in Chapter 11, municipalities may impose a city sales tax for economic development projects, and many of them have used such a tax to subsidize mass transit authorities (MTAs). Most MTAs have focused their resources on bus transportation, but several larger metro areas have in recent years made significant investments in light rail. Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, and Austin have substantial metropolitan rail projects in various stages of implementation, but plans for high-speed rail lines between major cities have encountered heavy resistance. A privately funded high-speed rail line (the Texas Central) between Houston and the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex has been stalled in court battles with landowners and other opponents and is not expected to be operational at any time in the near future.
Proponents of mass transit point to the enormous social and personal costs of automotive transportation. Texas's annual highway death toll is over 4,000, and thousands more are injured. The motor vehicle is also the single most important contributor to atmospheric pol- lution, a major factor in climate change, and a significant source of refuse that finds its way into junkyards and landfills. As the least efficient mode of transportation currently available, dependence on the individual motor vehicle is in direct conflict with the need to conserve energy and reduce our dependence on fossil fuels.
Urban mass transit was widely used before the end of World War II, and supporters of mass transit argue that adequate public funding could once again make railroads and buses rapid and comfortable alternatives to automotive transportation. When gasoline prices increase, more Texans seem to be receptive to the use of mass transit where it is available.
Critics argue that making mass transit a viable alternative to motor vehicle transportation
would require a massive investment of public funds. And, given Texans' love affair with the automobile and their strong cultural individualism, they are skeptical that the public will respond to a costly investment in mass transit with increased ridership without a catastrophic energy or environmental crisis. In Texas's conservative political environment, it is doubtful that Texas will readily increase public funding for local mass transit authorities.
Applying What You Have Learned about Public Policy Issues
LO 12.6 Apply what you have learned about Texas public policy.
You have learned that public-education policy making in Texas is a joint state-local respon- sibility and that the Foundation School Program is organized as a state-local partnership. The Texas Legislature has recently expanded state resources available to the public schools through the FSP with the passage of HB 3; so, we asked Senator Powell to explain the new legislation along with some of the most recent developments in state public education policy. Senator Beverly Powell (D-Burleson) was elected in 2018 to represent the people of Texas
Senate District 10, covering much of Tarrant County, including parts of Fort Worth and
the surrounding area and held in office between 2019 and 2023. She previously served for a
decade on the Burleson Independent School District Board of Trustees, including 2 years as
President, in addition to serving on the Texas Wesleyan University Board of Trustees, where
she continues to serve on the Chairman's Council.





















































































































